REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

BeitrememberedthattheCommonCounciloftheCityofSouthBend, Indianametinthe
CouncilChambersoftheCounty-CityBuildingonMonday, September28at7:00p.m.  The
meetingwascalledtoorderbyCouncilPresidentTimScottandtheInvocation (OliverDavis)  
andPledgetotheFlagweregiven.   

ROLLCALL

COUNCILMEMBERS:  

Present: 

TimScott
HenryDavis, Jr. 
ValerieSchey
Dr. FredFerlic
OliverJ. Davis
GavinFerlic
KarenL. White

st
1 District, (President)  
nd
2 District (arrived7:08pm)  
rd
3 District
th
4 District
th
6 District
At-Large
At-Large, ChairpersonCommitteeoftheWhole

Absent:  

DerekDieter
Dr. DavidVarner

At-Large, (Vice-President)  
th
5 District

OTHERSPRESENT:  

KathleenCekanski-Farrand CouncilAttorney
AdrianaRodriguez
ResearchAssistant
Deputy
JaniceI. Talboom
KareemahFowler
ChiefDeputy

REPORTFROMTHESUB-COMMITTEEONMINUTES
CouncilmemberOliverDavismadeamotionthattheminutesoftheSeptember14,  2015,  
meetingoftheCouncilbeacceptedandplacedonfile. CouncilmemberValerieScheyseconded
themotionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.   

th

SPECIALBUSINESS

15-84

ARESOLUTIONOFTHECOMMONCOUNCILOFTHECITYOFSOUTH
BEND, INDIANA, PUBLICLYTHANKINGRONTEACHMAN, FORHIS
SERVICEAS61THESOUTHBENDPOLICEDEPARTMENT

CouncilmemberOliverDavispresentedResolution15-84tothefullCouncil.   Councilmember
OliverDavisstatedourchiefofpolicecouldnotbehere, ournewChief, ChiefRuszkowskiwill
acceptonhisbehalf.  ThankyouRonTeachmanforservingasthe61stPoliceChiefoftheCityof
SouthBend. WeasktheCityCouncilofTheCityofSouthBend, Indianarecognizesthatposted
ontheSouthBendPoliceDepartment’sWebsitearewordsinthechief’smessagewhichreadsas
follows:  

Asocietyfreefromcrime, violence, andaccidentalinjuryremainsanunachievedideal. Itis
thereforethemissionoftheSouthBendPoliceDepartmenttoseekandfindwaystoaffirmatively
promote, preserve, anddeliverafeelingofsecurity, safety, andproductivequalityservicesforall
citizensinourcommunity.   

Weunderstandthatbuilding, cultivatingandmaintainingthecommunity'strustisakeyelement
incrimereductioninourCity. OurultimategoalattheSouthBendPoliceDepartmentisto
improvethequalityoflifeforallourcitizensaswellasothersweserve.   

WhereasRonTeachmanwasappointedSouthBendChiefofPoliceinJanuary2013, havingbeen
athirty-four (34) yearveteranoftheNewBedfordPoliceDepartment, servedastheirchieffrom
2006to2011, servedontheMassachusetts Governor’sAnti-CrimeCouncilSubcommitteeon
UrbanViolenceandwasalsothefirstSouthBendPoliceChieftoholdalawdegreehavingearned
hisJurisDoctorateMagnaCumLaudein1994.  WhereasthecouncildidformallywelcomeChief

1

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

TeachmanwhentheyhostedaneventattheKrocCommunityCenterwherethepublicgreetedand
heardChiefTeachman’svisiononpublicsafety.  NowbeitresolvedbytheCommonCouncilof
theCityofCitySouthBendasfollows:   

OnbehalfoftheresidentsoftheCityofSouthBendIndiana, theCommonCouncilthanksand
recognizes ChiefTeachmanforstrivingtoimplementbestpracticesinpolicing. Bylaunching
manynewinitiativessuchas: OperationCeaseFire, theeveryThursdaymorningCAMmeetings
whichalllevelsofpublicsafetyofficialsservingthroughouttheSt. JoeCounty, justtonamea
few, whichhavehelpedfoster, provideguidance, andleadershipinpursuingthepolice
department’smission.  Toseekimprovementsinthequalityofpoliceserviceprovidedtothe
peopleofSouthBend.  ThankyouChiefTeachman.    

CouncilmemberKarenWhite – IwouldliketothankCouncilmemberOliverDavisforbringing
forththisresolutionwhileIwishtheverybesttoChiefTeachman, Ilookforwardtoworkingwith
ChiefScott, welcomeaboard.    

CouncilmemberGavinFerlic – AbigthankyoutoChiefTeachmanbutcongratulationstoChief
Ruszkowski.  

CouncilmemberDr. FredFerlic – IapplaudandrespectallthatChiefTeachmandidforus.  He
applieddisciplineandmetricstoadepartment.   IthinkthatChiefRuszkowskiwillcontinuewith
that.  SobestoflucktoChiefTeachmanandhisfutureendeavorsandhehaveallthehappinessin
theworld.   

CouncilmemberValerieSchey – InChiefTeachman’sabsenceIwouldliketotakethisopportunity
tocongratulateChiefRuszkowski. WecertainlyarelookingforwardtoyouasourChiefandithas
alwaysbeenapleasureandIamsureitwillcontinuetobeapleasureworkingwithyou.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavis, Jr. – I’mgoingtoechothesamesentimentsasthecouncilmember
tomyleft, Valerie, congratulationsChiefScottonyournewappointmentIknowyouhavebeen
lookingforwardtothisforaverylongtime. Youworkedhardtogetheresolet’smakesomething
happen, man. Ilookforwardtosomegoodstuffhappening.    

PresidentTimScott – I’dalsoliketothankChiefTeachmanforhisserviceandanybodywhosteps
upintolawenforcementintheirservice.  Anybodywhostepsupputsabadgeonandgoesoutand
doesthatforhoweverlongorshortoftimethey’vebeenhereinthecitywethankhim forhis
leadershipandbestoflucktohim.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- AgainI’dliketothankourChief.  Ilookforwardtonewand
excitingthingswithournewchief.   

ChiefRuszkowski- OnbehalfofChiefTeachmanIknowheisalittlebusyrightnowinthe
transitionfromthepublicsafetyperspectiveavenuethatwehavetotheprivatesector. Tosaythat
heisrunningfromAtoBwouldbeanunderstatement.  Hehasbeeninandoutoftheofficeabout
40-50timestodaytryingtogetthingscaughtup.  Icanassureyouthatheismuchhumbledand
appreciativeofwhatyou’vedonewiththisresolution. Iwillmakesurethathegetsit. And, again
onbothofourbehalvesthankyouforyoursupportofthechiefandmyself.  Thankyou.   

CouncilPresidentTimScott- ThisbeingthetimeheretoforesetforthePublicHearingonthe
abovebill, proponentsandopponentsweregivenanopportunitytobeheard.  

TherebeingnoonepresentwishingtospeaktotheCouncilinfavoroforoppositiontothisbill,  
CouncilmemberGavinFerlicmadeamotiontoadoptbyacclamationBill15-84.   
CouncilmemberKarenWhitesecondedthemotionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7)  
ayes.  

CouncilmemberGavinFerlicmade amotiontocontinueBill 15-93toOctober12, 2015.   
CouncilmemberValerieScheysecondedthemotionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7)  
ayes. 

th

2

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

REPORTSOFCITYOFFICES
TherewerenocityreportsfromCityOffice

RESOLVEINTOTHECOMMITTEEOFTHEWHOLE
At7:31p.m. CouncilPresidentTimScottrequestedamotiontoresolveintotheCommitteeof
theWhole. SomovedbyCouncilmemberOliverDavis.  CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr.  
secondedthemotionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  CouncilmemberWhite,  
Chairperson, presiding.    

CouncilmemberWhiteexplainedtheprocedurestobefollowedfortonight’smeetingin
accordancewithArticle1, Section2-11oftheSouthBendMunicipalCode.  

CouncilmemberWhitestatedthatabrochuremaybefoundontherailingintheCouncil
Chambersexplainingthoseprocedures.   

PUBLICHEARINGS

34-15

PUBLICHEARINGONABILLOFTHECOMMONCOUNCILOFTHE
CITYOFSOUTHBENDINDIANAANNEXINGTOANDBRINGING
WITHINTHECITYLIMITSOFSOUTHBEND, INDIANAAND
AMENDINGTHEZONINGORDINANCEFORPROPERTYLOCATEDIN
PORTAGETOWNSHIP

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhiterequestedadditional commentsfrom the Council
Attorney.  CouncilAttorneyCekanski-Farrandrecommendedamotiontohearthesubstitutebill
34-15andthatthebillbecontinued.  

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhiterequestedamotiontohearthesubstituteversionof
thebill. CouncilmemberValerieScheymadeamotiontohearthesubstituteversionofBill34-15.  
CouncilmemberGavinFerlicsecondedthemotionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes

CouncilmemberOliverDavisChairperson, Zoning & AnnexationCommittee, reportedthatthey
metthisafternoononthisbillandduetoalackofquorumthereisnorecommendation.  

Presenter: MatthewChappuies, ofAreaPlan: Officesonthe11thFloor:  ThisistheSouthwest
cornerofWesternAvenueandMayflower.  ThisisthefuturehomeoftheMartin’sgrocerystore.  
Thepetitionerisrequestingazonechangefromresidentialinthecountyaswellascommercialin
thecountytoCBAcommunitybusinessdistrictwithintheCityofSouthBendandaspartofa
voluntaryannexation.  Tothenorthofthesiteisaretailstripcenterzonecommercial.  Tothe
south, east, andwestispredominantlyaresidentialarea.   

Presenterbeginstouseslideshowpresentation) Thisisaviewfromthesitefrom, IbelieveJuly
lookingwestalongMayflower.  Thisisaviewofthesite, lookingdownthenowvacateHuronSt.  
ThereontherightisHuronSt. fromtheotherdirection. Thisisgoingeast.  Thesiteis
approximately8.4acresanddoescontaintheexistingTopNotchrestaurantthereontheNortheast
cornerofthesite.  Thesitewillalsocontaina40,000sq. ft. grocerystorenearthecenterofthe
site. ThestorewillbeorientedtowardMayflowerRd, howeveritwillaccessfrombothMayflower
andHollywood.  Aretentionbasinislocatedinthesoutheastcornerofthesiteandthesoutheast
propertylinewillbescreenedbytypeBheavylandscapescreening.  Thistypeofscreeningis
intendedtocreatevisualandsoundbarriersthatwillprotecttheneighborhoodresidentsfromthe
trafficandgeneraluseofthesite.  ThewestpropertylinealongHollywoodBlvd, here, will be
screenedbymatureevergreentreesaswellasaseven (7) footornamentalscreeningfence.  That
isagaintoprotecttheneighborhoodresidentsfromthenoiseoftrashcollectionaswellasthe
deliveriesthatmayoccurattherearofthesite. Thisisadrive-thrulane, outdoorsettingareaon
thesouthportionofthesite.  Ibelievethatisintendedforsomesortofcoffeeshop.  Therewere
severalvariancesthatthecompanydid.  However, thestaffworkedwiththedeveloperatlength
toensurethesitewouldnotbeinjurioustotheneighborhood.  Asnotedthisisanamendedbill.   
TheoriginallegaldescriptionhaschangedandI’llletthepetitionerexplainwhythathappened.   

3

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

Theareaplancommissionsendsthistoyouwithafavorablerecommendation.  AtthistimeI’dbe
happytoansweranyquestions.   

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhiteaskedforquestionsfromthecommittee.   

CouncilmemberValerieSchey- Myquestionsforyouaretwofold, theannexationofthisparceldo
weasaCityalreadyhavewaterandsewerinthevicinity.   

Mr. Chappuies: Yeswedo. Theywillbeconnectingaspartoftheannexationprocess.  

CouncilmemberValerieSchey- Willwebejustrunningfromthemainvalve, isthatconvenient?  

Mr. Chappuies: Ican’tanswerthat.  Ibelievethatthepetitionermaytouchonthatalittlebit.   
Howevertherewillbeapresentationontheannexationprocessandthatwillbelaterthisevening
byMikeDivitaandIbelieve he’sheretoanswerthosetechnicalissuequestionsofwhattheCity
willbeinvestingin.    

rd

CouncilmemberValerieSchey- TheotherquestionIhadisIlearnedwithsomedevelopments in
the3 District, thepromiseofthebuffer, thebushes, therehavebeensomebusinessesinthethird
thathaven’tupheldtheircommitmenttoputtingthebuffers, thetreebufferin. Isthereanysortof
writtencommitmentinthissiteplanthatthosetreeswillinfactbeplanted?  

AreaPlanPresenter:  Yesthereis.  TheyarepartofthevariancesthatwereapprovedbyAreaPlan
Commission. WhatyouseeonthescreenandwhatIdescribedaswellisrequiredaspartofthis
billpassing.    

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Firstofallthetraffic, couldyoutalkaboutthetrafficstudy?  There
isagreatconcernregardingaddingmoretrafficonthecornerofWesternAveandMayflower.   

Mr. Chappuies:  IdounderstandthatthatisaconcernandIamawarethecityisrequiringthe
developertopayforatrafficanalysis.  However, thedetailsofthatIwillleavethatuptothe
petitioneraswellasthedepartmentofcommunityinvestment.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- AlsoIwouldlikeforyou orthepetitionertotalk aboutthe
HollywoodBlvd. trafficandrationaleofwhythatbackentrancehastoremainopen. Isthereany
otherconsiderationforthattobeclosed?  Couldyoushedsomelightonthattopic?    

AreaPlanPresenter:  Itismyunderstandingthatcityengineeringrequestedthataccessremainon
HollywoodBlvd. foraccessforemergencyvehiclesandevacuation, thingsofthatnature.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- IsthereanyonefromCityEngineeringwhocanpresentonthat? I
askedforthemtobeheretonight.  Ireallyneededthattobecomingfromacityengineer. Alotof
residentshaveaskedmeaboutthat.  We’vehadmeetingsaboutthat.  Thatwasakeythingand
theirpublicworksdirectorheardaboutthatthisafternoon. Thoseofficialsareherenow?  Thank
God.  Iappreciateit.  Ihadalotofissuesaboutthatcomingup.  Doeshewanttotalkaboutthat
nowordoeshewanttotalkaboutthatthen, afterthepetitioner?  We’regoingtohearfromour
publicworks.  Ihavequestionsforhimregardingthosematters.  We’llhavequestionswiththe
publicworksdirectorsohecanaddressalltheHollywoodBlvd. issuesandtoseeifthereisany
possibilityofanyleewayonthat.  Andsayifthatwecanhaveouremergencyroutescomeinthere
withouthavingto causetrafficproblemsforourneighbors.  AndyetMartin’scanstillmove
forwardwiththeirproposal.  That’swhatI’mhopingtohearattheendofthis.   

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- Thankyouverymuch.  Thankyouforyour
presentation.  Weaskthatthepetitionercomeforward. Stateyournameandaddress. Iwouldalso
likefor acityrepresentativetobereadytorespondtosomethequestionsthatwereaddressed
earlierthisafternoon.   

MikeDanch (DanchandDanch) SouthBend, Indiana- AsMatthewhadmentionedwhatweare
askingtodoaretwothingsthisevening.  Thefirstoneisweareaskingthispropertytobeannexed
intotheCityofSouthBend.  AsMatthewhadmentionedthepropertyrightnowisinthe

4

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

incorporatedareaofthecounty.   We’vegotacoupledifferentzoningclassifications fromB- 
Businessandresidential.  We’dliketobringtheentireparcelinasCBcommunitybusiness.  This
wouldallowforthegrocerystoreandalsotheexistingrestaurant. That’soneofthethingswe’re
askingthecouncilthiseveningtodo.  Thesecondistoactuallyrezonethepropertyandthatis
consistentzoningunderthecityguidelineswhatwearerequiredtodointhisparticular
developmentisweneedtohavecommunitybusinesszoningtoallowforthebothgrocerystore
andtoallowforthecontinuedoperationof therestaurant.  Thesiteplanthatyouseebeforeyou
thiseveningcoversabout8.5acresofgroundthereareaccesspointsonWesternAve. whichisan
existingaccesspoint.  ThereareacoupleofexistingaccesspointsoffofMayflowerRd. ofwhich
oneisexisting. TheonewhereweareproposinganewoneisdownattheSouthEastcornerand
thelastoneisanopeningontoHollywoodBlvd.     

Thesitewaslaidouttoorientthebuildingwhichisapproximately40,000sq. ft. towardMayflower
Rd.  ThebackofthebuildingwouldbetowardtheresidentialareaortowardHollywoodBlvd.   
ThemainaccesspointforthisdevelopmentistocomeoffofMayflowerRd.  Wehaveanopening
therethatshows, basically, anentrancewitharightturncominginandaleftturngoingout.  As
partoftheprocessthatwewentthroughfordevelopmentofthisproperty, weactuallywenttothe
countycouncilfirsttorequestavacationofHuronSt. Whichwasasixty (60) footwidededicated
right-awaythatwentbetweenMayflowerRd. andHollywoodBlvd.   Itwasastraightshotbetween
thosetwostreets.  September8 wemetwiththeCountyCouncilandthroughtheprocesswewere
abouttogetthatstreetvacatedwithanine (9) tozero (0) vote. Thereasonwehadgonethrough
thevacationprocesswastobringthisallinasoneparcelofground.  Wealsoworkedwiththe
adjacentwhichistheWestWindsTavernattheSouthEastcornerofthesite.   Weworkedouta
considerationwerewedidourdesignworksoitallowedhimtohaveaccesstoourmaindrive
awayaswell.    

th

Hisoneconcernwasthatsomeofthepatrons fromhisparticularestablishmentrestaurantand
tavernactuallyusedHuronSt. togoouttoHollywoodBlvd.  Oneoftheirconcernswastomake
suretherewasaccessforhisbusinessfromhisparticularfacilityattheSoutheastcornerofour
propertyovertoHollywoodBlvd. Thewaythisplanistotakethatintoconsiderationwediditin
suchawaytomakeitmoredifficultfortrafficcomingfromoffMayflowerRd. overtoHollywood
Blvd.   AsMatthewhadalsomentionedaspartofthedevelopmentweaskedforseveralvariances
forthedevelopmentitself.  Themajoronesthatweworkedwiththestaffonwasformitigation
betweenthissiteandtheresidentialpropertytotheWestandtotheSouth.  AsMatthewhad
mentionedalongHollywoodBlvd. wearedoingacoupledifferentthings.  Behindthebuildingor
towardtheWestsideandalongHollywoodBlvd. wearegoingtobeputtingupscreening. There’ll
beaslightbermtherewereyouseethatgreenareaontheoverhead, alongwithevergreentrees
andasolidscreeningfence. Thereasonforthatwastomitigateanyvisualifyouwerelooking
fromthoseresidentialtooursitebutalsoforasoundbarrier.  Tothesouththerewasanexisting
home, weagainaddedsomeadditionallandscapingalongthere.  Wealsohadaretentionareaso
thatgaveusabufferareabetweenthatexistinghouseandwhereanyoftheparkingareaswereor
totheproposedbuildingthatyousee.    

Weactuallyworkedagainwiththetavernownerbecauseofthewaythecityordinancesarethe
tavernisactuallyzonedresidential.  Thatwouldhaverequiredevergreenscreeningalonghisentire
boundarybetweenhispropertyandourproperty.   Hedidn’twantthat, hewantedtomakethathis
propertyandalsohavevisibilityfromMayflowerRd. Sooneofourvariancesthattheyactually
requestedfromthePlanCommissionwastobeallowedtouselowershrubsalongoursoutheast
boundarybetweenourpropertyandWestWindsTavern.  Wetriedtoworkwithhimtobeableto
takethatintoconsideration. Hewassatisfiedwiththeresultofourparticulardesign.  Asfaras
drainagewillgoonthisparticularsitewewillbeheldtotheCitystandardsofthesiteitselfis
goingtobefilledintheareawhereyouseetheparkinglotandthebuilding.  Wewillhavea
combinationofaFrenchdrainsystemforsurfacerunoffandretentionareathatisrequiredbythe
CityofSouthBend.  Theirrequirementbasicallystateswhateveryourimpervioussurfacesbeit
buildingorparkingareasthatyouhavetomeetcertaindrainagestandardsandyouhavetohold
thoseonyourproperty.  Itisnotallowedtorunoff-site. So, thisplanwilltakethatintoaccount
whenwegettothefinalsiteplanstage, assumingthatwereceivetheprojectapproval. Oneofthe
otherquestionsIbelievethattheCouncilmanhadaskedwashasMartinsSupermarkethiredJPR
togooutanddoatrafficstudy.  Afterwehadgonethroughthestreetvacationprocesswiththe
county, Raphael Morton, the CouncilPresidenthadaskedmetohaveameetingwithCounty

5

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

engineeringandCityEngineeringonouraccesspointsonHollywoodBlvd. todiscuss that
particularissue.    

WedidhavethatmeetingwithboththeCityEngineeringandtheCountyEngineering; theresult
ofthatmeetingwasthattheCityaskedtodoatrafficimpactanalysisstudyforthisparticular
project. Thescopeofthatprojectistodeterminetheimpactthetrafficwouldhavecomingoffof
MayflowerRd., WesternAve., andalsooffofHollywoodBlvd.  Theywantthatstudytotakeinto
accountbothtrafficenteringandleavingthesite.  Thatstudywouldhavetakenintoaccountwhat
wouldhavetobedoneinorderforustobeallowedtobuild.  So, ifthereareanyimprovements
forme, thoseadjacentroadways.  Thatimpactstudywouldsaywhatwouldneedtobedone.  That
wouldbecomepartoftherecord. Thatwouldalsobepartoftheapprovalprocessforthefinalsite
plan.  Ibelieveonethecouncilmembershadaskedwhenthoseimprovementswouldhavetogo
inplace.  ThosewouldhavetogoinplaceiftherearethosekindsofrequirementsthattheCity
dictatesforthisdevelopment.  Thosewouldhavetobedoneaspartoftheconstructionprocessfor
thegrocerystore.  Weweregoingtotakealookatthatissuewehadmetwiththemembersfrom
thecityengineeringdepartmentandcountyengineeringdepartment.  Oneofthethingsthatthey
didbringupwastheyprefertohaveanaccesspointontoHollywoodBlvdforsafetyreasons.  
Theirconcernwaswithanykindofdevelopmentifanyofotherwaysintothesiteordevelopment
wouldbeblockedforwhateverreasonwhethertherewassomeproblemonMayflowerorWestern,  
theyneededtohaveanotherwayintothisparticularsite.    

ThewaywedesignedtheaccesspointontoHollywoodBlvdistomakeitonlyforvehicles.  The
waythisentiresitewasdesignedwasthattrucktrafficcan’tcomeoffofHollywoodBlvd. intothis
site.  Theycouldn’tmaketheturningradiuses.  Thewaywe’veplanneditisthattheywouldcome
ineitheratourSoutheastcornerorcomeinthemainentranceandthengobehindthebuildingafter
theyunloadtheywouldbeabletoleaveandgouptoWesternAve. andbackovertoMayflower.   
OrtheywouldbeabletocomebackouttoourmainentranceandbackouttoMayflowerandthen
makealeftorarightturnonMayflower.  TheaccessisnotenoughtomakeaturnoffofHollywood
Blvd.  SoIthink, whatwe’vetriedtodoistodesignitforthatparticularcase.  Oneoftheother
questionsthatthecouncilhadaskedwasthetypeofinfrastructurethatwouldhappen onthe
particulardevelopment.  WehavebeenworkingwiththeCityonthisforseveralmonthsandone
ofthingstheCityhadaskedustodois, thereisaten (10”) footwaterlinethatisupattheTop
Notchrestaurantsitethatdeadendsintoourproperty.   

TheCityaskedusatourexpensetoloopthatlineandbringitupalongMayflowerRd. andthen
tieitbackintothesubdivisiontotheEast. So, Martin’sSupermarketwillbedoingthose
improvementsatourcost.   Wewouldalsobeextendingthewaterlineandprobablyanotherloop
aroundintothepropertyforfireprotection.  Thereisanexistingsanitarysewerlinethatisrunning
throughthevacatedHuronSt. Sowewillbetyingintothat, that’sanexistingsanitarylinethat
doesnothavetobeimprovedorextended, thatisalreadyonsite.  Anyoftheotherutilitieswe
wouldhavetopayforbringingthemontotheproperty.  Oneoftheotheritemsthatweweredoing
aspartofthisprojectassumingthatwereceiveapprovalandwemoveontothenextstepisthat
wearegoingtobeworkingwithTranspoonthisparticularproject.  Wearegoingtoenduphaving
abusdrop-offareaatthefrontofthestore. Wehadbeenworkingonouroriginalplansthefirst
timethatwetalkedaboutdoingthisparticularproject, Transpohadthoughtaboutdoingabus
drop-offalongMayflowerRd. andwesaidthat’salittletoofarawayforpatronsorforpeopleto
walkfromMayflowerRd. tothestore.  Thatwewouldactuallyprovideanareainfrontofthe
buildingsothatthebusactuallycomesinanddropsofforpicksuppeople.  Thenbecauseofthe
waythatwedesignedthesitetheywouldbeabletopullbackoutandcontinueonroute.    

Assumingthisgetsapprovedthatwillbepartofthefinalsiteplanprocedure; we’llbeworking
withTranspoonthataswell.  Webelievethatwe’vedoneeverythingpossibletotrytodesignthis
sitetofitandthewaywedesigneditwiththelandscapingorientationofthebuilding, wherethe
parkingareaislocated.  Oneofotheritemsthatwasmentionedwaslightingthatwedoforthese
particularsitesbecauseofthewaytheSouthBendzoningordinanceiswrittenwearevery
restrictedonthetypeoflightingwecanuseorthesiteimprovements.  Thelightinghastomeeta
certainstandard.  Theactuallightpolesareusuallyaroundtwenty-five (25) feettall, theyarefully
shielded, andoneofthethingswehavetosubmitaspartofthefinalsiteplanprocedureiswhat
theycallaLumensplan.  ThatLumensplanbasicallydictatesthefootcandlesoranylightspillages
alongtheadjacentpropertylinebetweenusandanyadjacentpropertyownerorpublicstreet.   

6

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

UndertheCityofSouthBendstandardsthatisazerofootcandle, whichmeanswecan’thaveany
lightspillageoveronitsadjacentproperty.  Sothatwouldalsobeapartofthefinalsiteplan
procedure. WhatwewouldaskCounciltodoisapprovetheannexationrequestthatwearedoing
andalsoapprovethezoningfortheCBdistrict.  Whatwewillprobablybeseeinghereisa
developmentinexcessof10milliondollarsbroughtintotheCityofSouthBend.  Ifyouhaveany
questionsIwouldbegladtoanswerthem.   

Committee oftheWholeChairpersonWhite- I’mgoingtostartwiththeCouncil intermsof
questions. ThenIamgoingtoaskthatourPublicWorksDirectorEricHorvathcometothepodium
aswell. Atthistime, thisistheopportunitytoaskquestionsofthepetitioner.    

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Couldyouclarifywhatwouldhappenifthespillageoflighting
comesintothepeople’shomes?  Iknowthatwehaveazerorateforthecity, butwhathappensfor
thecountyhousesaroundthere? Ifpeoplewholiveinthecountyhappentohaveproblemswith
lightingwhatshouldtheydo?  Parkingretentionissues, yousaidthatthereisadifferenceofthe
parkinglot, couldyouexplainthatalittlebitbetterforpeopletounderstandthat. Hoursof
operation, security, andwhetherTopNotchisstillgoingtobearound.  Thelastthing, Iwantthe
publicworkspersontotalkaboutistherationaleofwhytheywantedtokeepHollywoodBlvd. for
securityreasonsortrafficreasonsandifthereisanyotherconfigurationthatcouldbedoneor
anythingelsetokeeptrafficminimizedonHollywoodBlvd. Ifthereisanemergencywouldn’t
trucksbeincludedunderemergencypurposestoo?   

Mr. Danch - Firstthinglighting, whetheryouareinthecountyorthecitydoesn’tmakeany
difference, thesiteplanhastoreflectzerofootcandlesaroundtheperimeter.  Ifthereisanissue
withlightinganyoftheadjacentownersiftheythoughtthattherewaslightspillageorsomelight
pollutioncomingontotheirproperty, theycouldcheckwiththeCityBuildingDepartment.  We
arerequiredtosubmitaplananditshowswhat’sgoingonsothatthereisreliefforthatifthey
believethere’sasituation.    

TheBuildingDepartmentwouldcertainlyaskusoratleastcallustoasktogivethem
specificationsiftherewasaconcernaboutacertainlightfixture.  Theyhaveitshownontheplan
thatsomehowsomeonethoughtthattherewassomespillageoftheone. Thatwouldtakecareof
thatpart.  Regardingthedrainageissue, wehavebeendealingwiththeCityofSouthBend, we’ve
gotthelargeparkingareaandwe’vegotthebuildingthoseareourimpervioussurfaces.  Wehave
tohandlethesurfacerunoffbasedonthecitystandardswhichisaboutatwoinch (2”) rainfall.   
Thedistancesthatyouhaveonthatparkinglot, mostlikelyunderthatparkingareayouwillend
upwithsomepiping, youwillendupwithsomegravelthatyouwraparoundthepipeandthat’s
whatwecallaFrenchdrainingsystem.  Thatwillhandlethatsurfacerunoffthatcomesoffthat
parkinglot.  Ifyouhaveanoverflowareaoryou’repickingupwaterfromthebuildingthenthat
retentionareathatyouseeattheSouthwestcornerofthesiteiswherethatwaterwouldgoto.  That
isnotgoingtobeapond, thatisgoingtobeadrypond, andwehavesandysoilsthatareoutthere.   
Sothatisnotintendedtoholdwater, it’sbasicallytohandlearaineventbasedonthecitystandards.   
Sothat’showwetakecareofthatsituationagain, that’sreflectedonthesiteplanthatisreviewed
bycityengineeringandapprovedbycityengineeringforcapacity, routing, andthetypeofsystems
thatweuse.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- SecurityandHoursofOperation?   

Mr. Danch - HoursofoperationaretypicalofMartin’s, Ibelievefrom6a.m. to11p.m. iswhat
theydo. Security-wisetheydohaveasecurityofficerinthebuildingbutalsohavesecuritycameras
withinthebuildingitselfandontheoutsideofthebuilding.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Thelastquestionthatcameforthepublicworksdirectoraboutthe
trafficstudy.  

Mr. Danch - Ithinkwehadsaid, IamgoingtoletthePublicWorksDirectortalk, butoneofthe
pointsofhavingthestudydoneforthetrafficisalsotoallowforthatstudytoactuallyreflectwhat
itisanticipatedthatcarswouldbegoingoutontoHollywoodBlvd.  Sowhenyouaretakinga
lookatasitelikethiswhenwehavetwo-hundredandfifty (250) parkingspacesallthecarsare
notbeingdroppedontoHollywoodBlvd.  TheywillbegoingoutontoMayflowerRd. and

7

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

WesternAve. Soyouhavetheseotherareas, whereonlyaportionofyourpatronsareactually
goingtogooutonHollywoodBlvd.  Ifyoutakealookatitthere’shousestothewestofthis
particularsiteandyouwouldlikethemtobeabletogettothisparticularfacility. Maybesomeof
theotherpatronsdon’tliketouseMayflowerRd. ortheydon’tliketouseWesternAve. maybe
theyprefertohavealesstraveledwayiftheyaregoingthroughaneighborhood. Sometimesolder
residentsliketostayoffthemainroadsandtheyliketohaveawayintotheseparticularfacilities.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Youmentionedemergenciestoo. Couldyoutalkaboutthetrucks
again? Alsothisisgoingtogoupin2017andyou’resayingafterthetrafficstudy, aftertheyfind
whatevertheyfind, iftheyneedmoreroadorwhatever, thatwillbeapartoftheconstructionasit
goesupandnotafterit’sup.  

Mr. Danch - Thatwouldbecorrect. Whenyouaredoingthetrafficstudy, that’llbecomepartof
thesiteplanprocess. He’sgoingtobetakingalookatthatwhenwearehandlingplansforthe
buildingsite, howwedodrainage, howwedoouraccesspoints, thatstudywillbasicallytellthe
citywhatneedstobedone.  Thecitywillthentelluswhathastohappenaspartoftheapproval.   

ChairpersonWhite - Iamgoingtoaskcouncilmemberstoaddressanyquestionstheyhavewith
thepetitionerandthenourCityDirectorofPublicWorksandcomeback.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - Willthispetitionerbeseekingataxabatementthroughthecity
orthecounty?   

Mr. Danch- IftheyweregoingtodothatitwouldprobablyhavetobeintheCity.  Iamnotaware
ofanypetition.  Therearedifferentprocessesthatyouhavetogothrough. Iamnotawareof
anythingrightnow.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavis- Aretheyhere?   

Petitioner- Theyarehere.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr.- Wouldtheybeinterestedinansweringthatquestion?   

Mr. Danch - Theycoulddothat.    

RobertBartels760WCotter- Wedonothaveplansandhavenotrequestedanyofthoseabatement
kindsofthingsyet.  Wewillseewherethepricetagisoninfrastructureroadwayandtherest.  I
don’tknowwhatisgoingtoberequiredthereorwhatitmightrequirefromus. Wedon’thave
plansrightnow. Thathasn’tbeenapartofourprogramyet. Wewillseewherethecardsfallin
termsofcostandultimatelywhatthatroaddesignrequires.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr.- ThereasonwhyIaskedthatquestionisbecausewe’vehadthis
issuebeforeandIthinkthatwestatedthiswhenwewereatthepublicmeetingattheLaborer’s
Union. Ifearthat, notthatthisisyourissue, butwiththeCityhavinganotheremptybuildingona
mainthoroughfarethatthereisnointerestinlookingforanewtenantorhelpingsupportinfinding
atenantforthatbuildingandalsothetaxissueofbeingabletofileforataxabatementthrougha
countyandgettingzeroandtheCitygoesandannexestheareaunderthatsametaxabatementand
thenwehavetohonoritatzero.  That’swhyI’maskingthatquestion.   

RobertBartels- IthoughtIheardaquestionaboutthecurrentbuildingthatwe’reinrightnowand
itsfutureuse.  We’renotthelandlordinthatlocation. SoIhavenowayofknowingwhattheir
plansmightbefordevelopingthatcenterfurther.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - IsaidthatthatwasaCityissue. Iwasnotputtingthatonyou.  
Obviouslyyoucannotanswerthatquestion. Buttheotherquestionthatyoucananswerisabout
thetaxabatement.   

RobertBartels- Thatiscorrectsir.  Withouttryingtoexplaintaxabatementinitsentirety. There
issomeunforeseenpossibilityintermsofroadanddevelopment.  We’vebeenagoodcommunity
partnerandwedotherightthingsfortherightreasons. Wearelookingforwardtobeingearnest

8

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

inourendeavors.  However, Idon’tthinkthatit’sappropriateformetocommit.  Ihavenoidea
whatitmightshow.  Ifit’sreasonableandusuallythosethingsfallwellwithinwhatwearewilling
andcapableofdoing.  IknowthereareotherthingsthattheCityislookingat.  Secondly, weare
notescapingtaxes, we’reaskingtobecomepartoftheCityandpayCitytaxesandcontinueour
trackrecordofbeinggoodcorporatecitizens. I’mstuckbecausewithoutgoingintothemechanics
oftaxabatements, it’snotazerosumgame.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - Iwasn’ttryingtosuggestthatyouweretryingtoavoidtaxes.   
Itwasjustasimplequestion.  Asyoumovetothecounty, asyoucouldbeoraretryingtorelocate
tothecountythelawiswhatIstated, thatwewillhavetohonorwhateverthecountygivesyou.   
Whenoriftheannexationhappens. Idoknowwehadasimilarsituationwithanotherbusiness
wheretheyarenotpayinganythingatallandsotheCitywillnotrecoupanytaxesfromyournew
developmentperthecountyabatementlaw.  ThatiswhyIamaskingthequestion.  So, youare
stillsortofsayingyoumayormaynotknowwhat’sgoingon. Ifyoudon’tknowyoudon’tknow.    

RobertBartels- Theansweriswehavehadnoconversationwithanyoneabouttaxabatements at
allatthispoint.    

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- Atthistimewehavenootherquestionsforthe
petitioner. WedohavequestionsfortheDirectorofPublicWorks.   

th

EricHorvathPublicWorksDirector: Officesonthe13 Floor- Iappreciateyourtimethis
afternoonandIappreciateMartin’scontinuingtoinvestinthisareaandkeepingastoreinthis
area.  IthinkitisgreatthattheyaredoingthatIalsoappreciatetheeffortsthey’vemadetodayto
workwithlocalbusinessesandlocalresidentstotrytominimizeanyimpactsthattheirstorewill
haveinthisareaincludingatrafficimpactstudythatweareaskingthemtodo.  Ithinkthatreally
thecruxistryingtofindawaytokeepastoreherebutminimizeanyimpactsithasthroughlooking
atthelighting, lookingatthelandscape, andthenlookingatanypotentialtrafficissues. Idowant
topointoutthatthetrafficimpactstudywilltellthestoryinwhatwewillaskthemtodo. Ifwe
needdedicatedturninglanes, ifweneedexcel/ decellines, whateverweneedtodotomakesure
we’vegotsafetrafficmovementsthatcanhappenouthere.  Thatwillbepartofthattrafficstudy.  
Havingsaidthat, IalsoneedtomakesurethattheCouncilunderstandsthatHollywoodBlvdisa
countyroadandwillremainacountyroad.  Assuchthecitywillnothavejurisdictiononcurbcuts
norwillwehavejurisdictiononlimitingtrucksorotheractivity.  Soifwewanttoputsometype
oftrafficcontrolmeasuresinthere, untilit’saCitystreetwewillnothavetheabilitytodothat. I
dothinkintermsofthecurbcutonHollywoodBlvd., mystaffthoughtit’dbehelpfulforpublic
safetyaccess.  Thatwemakesurewehaveanumberofaccesspointsforpoliceandfireforany
instancethatwouldhappenthere.  TheydidrecommendhavingacutonHollywoodBlvd.  
Howeverjusttobeclearthatiscountyjurisdiction.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Howlongdoesatrafficstudytakeandthenwhenwillyoufindthe
resultsofthatandthenhowwillthatbereleasedtothepublic? Especiallytheneighborsandallof
usthatintheSixthDistrictofSouthBend. HowwouldIandallthecouncilfindthatout?  Let’s
sayeverythingwasapprovedtonight. Whenwouldwefindoutaboutitandisthereanyvoicethe
neighborshaveinthatstudy? Dotheysurveythem?  Tellmeaboutit.   

EricHorvath- DirectorofPublicWorksdeferredthequestionstoMichaelDanch.   

Mr. Danch - Theywillbecheckingtoseeifthescopeiscorrect, first.  Myguessisthatthiswill
beaboutafour (4) tosix (6) weekprocess.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- SobytheendofOctobermiddleofNovemberwewouldknow?   

Mr. Danch - AssoonaswegiveittotheCity, youcanshareitwiththecouncilmembersand
probablywhatwouldenduphappeningisonceyouseethatparticularstudyyou’reeithergoing
tobeincontactwithCityEngineeringtoasktothemquestionsaboutwhatthatstudyactually
represents.    

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Thentheresidentsthemselves, howcantheyfindoutaboutthat?   

9

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

Petitioner- Ifwesubmitittothecityit’spotentialpublicinformationatthatpointsotheywould
beallowedtorequestacopyofthat.   

EricHorvath- Wecanputthatonthewebsiteormakesurewearesharingwithfolks.  Atthepoint
wearesittingdownhavingdiscussionsitwillbedeliveredinmaterial.  Butoncewehaveafinal
documentonthetrafficimpactstudyit’llbeapublicdocumentthatwe’llshare. Wewillsitdown
withMartin’sandmakesurewe’vegotaplanthatworksforthem, worksforthecommunity, and
essentiallyawaywecanfeelcomfortablethatwe’llhavesafetrafficmovementsinthisarea.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Whoisinchargeofmakingthatstudy? IsitCitypeopleorisit
MACOGfolks?  Ifsomeonewantstotalktosomepeople, cantheywriteletterstopeopletoget
theirviewpoints heardsotheneighborsandpeoplecanhavesomesay, oristheprofessionals
themselvescomingtogetherwithoutanyinputfromanybody? Whatisit?   

Petitioner- No, that’swhatitis.  TheCityhasaskedforatrafficimpactstudytobedonebya
professionaltransportationengineer.  Thereisnotasurveythatgetsdonewhentheseprofessionals
startdoingthisparticularanalysis. Whattheytakealookatiswhat’sproposedforaparticularsite,  
thesizeofthebuilding, whattheturnoutwouldbe, theparkinglotandusagethatisgoingtogo
onthisparticularpropertyandbasedonthatinformation, andtheylookathistoricaldatabasedon
thesetypesofdevelopments.  Theywillcomeupwithaformulathatsayshowthetrafficisgoing
toworkatthisparticularlocationbasedontheirbestestimates. That’swhattheCityisaskingfor.   
That’showtheCitydoestrafficimpactstudies.  Foralltheirarterials, theyhavetheTraffic
EngineertakealookatthoseandthentheCitytakesthatinformationtomakeanykindof
improvementordowhattheythinktheyneedtodo.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Ifanybodyviolatesthe issueonHollywoodit’snottheCity’s
responsibilityitwouldbethecounty’sresponsibility?  

EricHorvath- ThiswillneedtobeajointeffortbetweentheCityandCountywhenwe getthe
trafficimpactstudysothatthecountyison boardwithanyimpactonHollywoodBlvd. and
actuallyportionsofWesternAve. aswell.     

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Thankyouforyourtime.   

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- WewillnowmoveintothePublicHearingportion.   

ThisbeingthetimeheretoforesetforthePublicHearingontheabovebill, proponentsand
opponentsweregivenanopportunitytobeheard.  

Thosewishingtospeakinfavor:  

MurrayMiller, 1201S. PriscillaDr. - IaminfavorofthenewMartin’sstore.  Ithinkany
improvementstotheWestsideofSouthBendaregreatlyneededandwelcomed.  Iliveandwork
withinasixblockradiusofthenewMartin’s, soIthinkit’sagreatimpactfortheWestsideof
SouthBendandIaskthatyouapprovethat.   

SteveMoore, 53154WildlifeTribeofSouthBend- Ithinkit’sgreatIhavebeenshoppingatthis
Martin’sonWesternAvesince1981.  Ijustthinkit’stimeforanewstore.  Ithinkit’llhelpthe
WestsidealotandbringalotofnewcustomersnotonlytoourstorebutalsotheWestside.   

RichardandChristineHolland, 13116FlowingStreamCt.- I’minfavorofthenewMartin’s, I
thinkthatmovingbacktothewestendisagreatthingthatMartin’sisdoing.  It’sgoingtobecome
adestinationplace, whichIfeelisgoingtohelpthewestendhopefullydrawsomeofthatbusiness
fromtheGrapeRd. areaontowestend, becauseitisgoingtobeadestinationpoint. Wehavebeen
shoppingatMartin’s, IworkedforMartin’s, Ijustthinkit’sagreatthing. Iliveonthewestend.  
They’regoingtoputastoreonthewestendthatwecanbeproudof.  Iamdefinitelylooking
forwardtoalloftheamenitiesMartin’shastoofferatsomeoftheotherstores. Puttingthoseon
thewestendwouldbeagreatasset.    

10

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

SamCentellas, 746S. MeadeSt. - We’reexcited, LaCasadeAmistadhasbeenpromotingalot
ofdevelopmentontheWestside, sowearejustgladtoseeabusinessinvestingontheWestsideof
townandputtinginagreatfacility.  Itshouldn’tjustbetheotherside oftownthathasgreat
facilities. WearethankfultoRobandhisteamwhoarecontinuingtosupporttheWestside.   

MarkNeal, 112W. JeffersonBlvd.- WhenIfirstmovedtoSouthBendin1979myMartin’swas
onPortageAve., theoriginalMartin’s. WhenwemovedagainmyMartin’sbecametheErskine
PlazaMartin’s.  MyMartin’snowisSR23andIronwoodandthequalityofourcommunityisin
partthestrengthofourlocalbusinesses. IthinkMartin’shasbeenatremendouscorporatecitizen.   
Whenyoulookattheallthethingsthattheypromote, thepridethattheytakeinourcommunity
andintheirstores, Ithinkthatthey’rejustanoutstandinglocalcorporatecitizenanddeserveour
support.   

Thosewishingtospeakinopposition:   

EricKazmanski, 56921HollywoodBlvd. - Allthesepeoplethatwereinfavorthat’sagreatthing
thatthey’reinfavor, thethingtheydidn’tmentionistheydon’tliveonHollywoodBlvd. andthey
don’tliveonElmerSt.  ThereasonIamheretodayisbecauseofconcernswehavewiththenew
Martin’sstorecomingintoourneighborhood.  Ourneighborhoodnowisaquietneighborhoodand
nodoubtwillbegreatlyimpactedbythisMartin’s.  Mr. OliverDavisandMr. HenryDaviswere
atourneighborhoodmeetingsotheyalreadyknowourissuesthatwewereconcernedandallthat
webroughtupatourneighborhoodmeeting, thebiggestproblemisthebackentranceoffof
Hollywood.   

It’sreallyanunneededtrafficprobleminourneighborhood. NootherMartin’shasabackentrance
intoaresidentialneighborhoodIbroughtthisupbeforetheysaid23andIronwoodhasone.  Itook
aridetheretheyhaveonelittlegateupaboutten (10) feetoffofIronwoodthatgoesintoa
neighborhoodthat’sthebackoftheircomplexintoacondosituation.  There’snoresidentialhouse
downinthatneighborhoodandthey’renotbeingimpacted, theydon’thaveGrantDr. slippage, all
thepeoplecomingfromthewestslippingintothatstreettocutthroughthatgasstationparkinglot
togetintotheMartin’s. Martin’ssay theyputabackentrancefortheresidentsinour
neighborhood.  Theresidentdon’twantit.  Ithinkmywifemailedyouapackagewithapetition
showingwedon’twantthat. Soiftheyaredoingitforusthey’redoingusnofavor. Asfarasthe
taverncustomersgotheydon’tliveinourneighborhoodeitherforthebulkofit.  Theydon’tneed
alittletrafficthingtosneakoutthroughourneighborhood. Attheend ofthecountycouncil
meetingCountyCouncilPresidentRaphael MortontoldMartin’sengineersheunderstandsour
concernsandtoldhimtocalltheCityEngineeringdepartmentandaddresstheseissues. Hesaid
hedidandIdidtalktoCityEngineeringandtheytoldusit’sacountyissue. Iamlittlebitconfused
onwhyit’sflip-floppingbothway.  Iunderstandit’sacountyroadandacitypropertypossibility.  
Thebiggestthingisthisbackentrance, Mr. Danchsaysthattheywantaportionofthetrafficto
sliponourroadwedon’twantthatportionofthattraffic.  Whywouldwewantthat? Icanstand
inmystreetforhalfanhouratatimeanddon’thaveonecar. Idon’twantallthosepeopledown
myneighborhood.  IfyouwanttogotoMartin’syougoaroundthefront. Asfarasemergency,  
okay, thereisaplacebyUPmallwheretheyhadthesameissuewhereallthetrafficwascutting
throughtheneighborhoodtheyputacrashgateup. Ifyouhaveanemergencytheycansnapthe
lockdrivethroughitwhatevertheyhavetodo. Theydon’tneedthisentranceopenallthetimejust
foreverybodytocutthroughourneighborhood. That’sreallyallIhavetosay. Thankyouforyour
time.   

DianaKazmanski, 56921HollywoodBlvd.- GoodeveningmembersoftheSouthBendCommon
Council. Ihopeyou’vehadanopportunitytoreviewthepackageofinformationIprovidedtoyour
office. InadditiontoMartin’spetitiontoannexandrezonethepropertylocatedatWestern,  
Mayflower, andHollywoodBlvd., I’dliketobringupforyourconsiderationpreventingMartin’s
fromhavinganaccessoffofHollywoodBlvd. AllowingMartin’stohaveanaccessoffof
HollywoodBlvd., wouldjeopardizethesafetyoftheresidentslivingintheareaandcausemajor
trafficproblems.  AsyoucanseefromthediagramMartin’splanstobuildadrive-thruservicefor
customerstopurchasecoffee. Asweallknowtrafficthedrive-thrucanbackupquickly.  Asa
resultdriverswillhavetowaitonHollywoodBlvd. beforeaccessingMartin’s. Theresidentswho
livedirectlybehindMartin’swillhavetowitnessanddealwithtrafficcongestionallday. The
secondtrafficproblemisattheintersectionofHollywoodBlvd. andWestern. HolyFamily

11

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

parishionersandparentsuseHollywoodBlvd. toaccessthebackentranceintoHolyFamily
Churchtoattendservicesanddropofftheirchildrenforschool.  CrossingoverWesternisalready
difficultasitis.  ButwithadditionaltrafficturningonHollywoodBlvd., therewillbeanincrease
inaccidentsatthisintersection. ThethirdtrafficproblemwillbeattheintersectionofHollywood
BlvdandGrant, everyonetravelingeastonGrantwilluseHollywoodBlvd. toaccessMartin’s.   
ThiswilljamtrafficonGrantasdriverswaittoturnonHollywoodBlvd. Martin’srepresentatives
havearguedthattrafficdownHollywoodBlvd. willbeminimalduetotheentrancesandexitsoff
ofMayflower, thisisfalse. SincethereisnoleftturnsignalattheintersectionofMayflowerand
Sample, trafficturningNorthontoMayflowerwillbegintopileup, deterringdriversfromusing
MayflowertoaccessMartin’sandinsteaduseHollywoodBlvd.  Everyonesaysthatthesetraffic
problemsonWesternandHollywoodandGrantandHollywoodBlvd. areINDOTissues. Let’s
pleasestoppassingthebuckandlet’spreventthesetrafficproblemsfrombeingINDOTissuesand
wecandothatbyclosingaccessfromHollywoodBlvd. intoMartin’s.  HollywoodBlvd. wasnot
designedtowithstandaheavilyvolumeoftraffic, it’sacountyroadnotamajorthoroughfare.  At
thecountycouncilmeetingonSept8 CouncilwomanDianaHessandCouncilmenRobert
Kruszynski, RaphaelMorton, MarkCatanzarite admonishedMartin’stotakeseriouslythe
concernsoftheresidentsanddosomethingtoresolvetheseproblems.  Martin’shasnotmadeany
concessionsorofferedanysolutionstothesafetyandtrafficproblems. Ispeakonlyonmybehalf,  
sincenoresolutionshavebeenofferedIproposewemaketheaccessoffofHollywoodBlvd. into
anemergencygateaccess. I’dalsoliketothankCouncilmanOliverDavisforhisassistance
regardingtheconcernsofourCountyresidents.   

th

ThomasKowalski, 56680HollywoodBlvd.- IspeakonbehalfofmyMomwhohaslivedat56680
HollywoodBlvd. since1954.  Ourpropertyisdirectlysouth, alongthesouth borderofthe
Martin’s.  Mymomwhois92wouldprobablyhitBobBartelswithhercanesheissoupset, that’s
adifferentstory.  Myconcernistheretentionpondbeingone-hundredand (150) feetfromour
well. Sinceweliveinthecountythesurroundinghomeshavewellwater.  Thepollutionoffofthe
overflowfromtheparkinglotmayintimepollutethewells. Whatkindofrecoursewillwehave?   
Secondly, shedoesnotwantthetrafficfromHollywoodBlvd.  Shedoesn’tparticularlylikecars
goingdownthestreet.  Nobodyhasmentionedtheconstructiontrucks.  Aretheygoingtouse
HollywoodBlvd. tohaulmaterialsinandoutoraretheygoingtouseMayflowerandWestern,  
whicharebuiltforheaviertraffic? SheisagainstitandIamagainstit.   

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite:  Wewillnowmovetotherebuttalandaskthe
petitionertocomebeforethecouncil, questionsregardingwellwater, runoff, andwhatimpactit
mayhave, constructiontrucks, andwholeissueofHollywoodGrant, Hollywood Blvd. and
WesternAve. andthebackentranceandthegateandwhetheritcouldbegatedtoallowfortrucks
tocomeinandout.   

th

RobertBartels (Petitioner) - Firstofall, alotofthingstalkingabouttraffic, we’vegotatraffic
studycoming. Iknowthatwewillrespondearnestlyandinaforthrightfashiontothosethings.   
Theotherissueisalargerzoningissuepiece.  We’regoingtobecomeneighborswithfolkswho
don’tcurrentlyhaveusasneighbors.  Thereisnothinglikeatrackrecordtohelpexplainsome
thingsand we’veheardconcernsaboutlight, concernsabouttraffic, trash, awholevarietyof
things.  Firstofall, wearetakingaproactiveapproachtowhatwedo.  Spentanhourandhalf
speakingwithneighborfolksonAugust26,  we’vemetextensivelywithengineeringandtraffic
folksandhaveengagedaprocessthatisthoroughandasfactbasedwecanpossiblygetit. Third
wedotakeallconcernsasseriouslyaswecan.  Itisverydifficulttoanswerthingsinanabstract
waythough.  Iamnotsurewhatmighthappenifwetrytofocusonwhathashappened.  Hereare
alistofninestoreswhereweareinverycloseproximitytoneighbors, tosideroads, toresidential
areas, asIlookatacoupleofthings.  Asyoucanseeourbackparkinglotissomething inthe
natureoftwelve (12) tofifteen (15) feetfromthehouseswithinthatsquareonthatcorner.  Thisis
anareawhereyouhaveheavyremonstrance.  Martin’sSupermarket, wedidtherightthingsfor
therightreasons, wetookcareofthetrees, wetookcareoftheshading, wetookcareofthesound
andwemadeadifference.  Hereisaneighborhoodthatisessentiallysurroundingourstoreand
hasmanyofthesamekindsoffeaturesthatwearediscussingheretoday.  Wheredoestrafficgo
andhowdowehandleit?  Whatdowedoascorporatecitizensyounoticecarsparkeddirectly
nexttoaroofthatisontheright.  Wetalktothatneighborfrequentlyandwedon’thavecomplaints.  
Here’souruniversitystorethatgoesonaresidentialstreet.  Theywereconcernedaboutushaving
thisaccess. Wesaidnototrucktrafficinitially, wehadthefencethatyouareaskingaboutthere.   

12

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

Wehavesinceleftitopenandpossiblyhaveremoveditbecauseitwasn’taconcernoranissue.   
Hereisanideawitharetentionpondthatisinthelightblue, thereishousingjusttothenorth,  
thereishousingjusttotheSouthwestandagainthatstorehasbeenthereforafewyearsandwe’ve
nothadissues.  Here’saretentionpond, directlyacrossthestreetfromaresidentialarea, tothe
right-handsidethatisafuelingcenterthatisjusttotheleftofthatbluearea. Hereisaresidential
areathatisrightnexttoastorethathadextensivelightconcerns. Weusetheappropriate
landscaping, wehavetheappropriatefencing, trashcontrolandit’sawindyarea.  Wedealwith
ourneighborhoodwell. ThisisourstoreinWarsawwherewereactuallyrequiredtoputaback
entranceintoaresidentialzoneandhadtheopportunitytoaddanaccessintoaresidentzone.  So
theresidentscouldskipgoingontomoreheavilytrafficsareasandgetdirectlyintoourparking
lot.  Wehaveextensiveexperienceinwhatwearedoing. Wearetryingtodothingsintheright
way. Wearealsobeingattentivetoconcerns. That’sit.    

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - Iwanttobeclearaboutthis, Ilistenedtoalloftheconversations,  
theprosandcons.  Ithinkit’sawesomethatsomeoneisinvestinginthewestendoftown, Ithink
it’sawesometoseeastorethathasseenit’sbetterdaysexpandinanarea, thatsorelyneedsto
grow, andappearanceimprovementstheothersideofthisconversationaboutzoninghasalotto
dowiththepeoplewholiveinthisareaandbeingperhapsdisruptedfromyourusuallylifeand
lookIagree.  IhaveasmallchildandIdon’twanttoseeanyextratrafficonmystreeteither.  
Sometimeswecancontrolthosethingstomakesureit’smaintainedandmadeassafepossibleis
somethingthatwecanworkreallyhardatandchange. ThequestionthatisstilloutthereandI
thinkImadethisveryclearabouthadeverythingtodowiththetaxissue.    

I’mgoingtakeanotherminutetoexplainwhyIgoatthatpointveryhard.  Thetaxissueisanissue
withequality. SouthBendhasaproblemwithequality.  TheCitygovernmentdoesandasaresult
mostbusinessesinthisareahaveanequalityissue. Peoplewhoareofcolorinseniormanagement
positions, peoplethatworkinthestoresthatareofcolor, Iamnotjusttalkingaboutblackpeople;  
Iamtalkingaboutblackandbrownpeople. WhenIgetintothoseconversationsandhowwework
towardsamoreequitableSouthBend, thosenumbersandthatrealitydoesnotexist. So, whenwe
getintotheconversationaboutthetaxabatementthetaxabatementwillaskwhoisapartand
whoeverisusingthetaxabatementwhethertheywillhaveX-amountofminoritiesisgoingtoask
anumberofquestionsandusuallythosequestionsaresomewhatansweredatbest. Attheendof
thedaythattaxabatementisusuallygiven.  Becausetheyablewereabletoanswerotherquestions
thatmadeuptheamountpointsthattheyneededtogetthefive (5) year, eight (8) year, ten (10)  
yearabatement.   

MyissueandIwillcontinuetostanduntilIcanseesomedifferenceintheattitudesintheCity.  If
Icansupportyourstoreinthewayofmydollars, Ishouldbeabletoseemyselfinthatstoreasa
workingpartneror/and/asaCitygovernmentwithtaxes. ButwhenIgetintothatconversationI
don’twanttogetstuckatthezoningandannexationissuebecausethereisalargeissuethere.  I
wanttocontinuetovoicemyconcernsasitrelatestothoseissues.  Wejustcan’tkeeplookingat
thesethingsasitrelatestoitsownstandaloneissueandthenmoveon. Aswecontinuethedivide
betweenpeopleofcolorandnon-colorcontinuestogrowandthenwhenwegetintoconversations
aboutthewealthgapandwegetintoconversationsabouthowwecanclosethatgaporhowwe
can’tclosethatgap.  It’swithinourpoliceforce, it’swithinourSouthBendFireDepartment, it’s
withintheotherdepartmentsoftheCity, itiswithinthemanyofthebusinessesintheCity. Ican’t
asacitycouncilmanbeingelectedfromadistrictofcolor, predominantlycolorcontinuetowatch
thepeoplethatIrepresentgounemployedorunderemployedbecausenoonewantstoaskthat
hardquestion. Iamnotashamedofit, I’mnotscaredofit, butwhatSouthBendhastodo, what
SouthBendneedstodoifit’sinterestedingrowingweallhavetobeatthetabletogetherweand
allhavetobeincluded.  SowhenIaskedthequestionaboutthetaxabatement, ifyouareseeking
onefinegreat. Howdoweworktowardsabetterday? Howdowegetmorepeoplefromthe
neighborhoodincludedinonworkingatthestore? Whetherit’stheconstructionpartorwhether
it’stheninetofivepart.  Idon’tknowhowtogetthatdonebutit’saquestionthatneedstobe
asked.  IfI’mspendingmymoneytherethatquestionsneedstobeasked.  Ifyouareofferingthe
storetoeverybodyintheneighborhoodtocomeshoptherethatquestionshouldbethefirst
questionasked. Yes, it’sgoingtobeaniceprettyshinystore.  IenjoythePaniniandgetmeafew
ofthemwhenIcan. Igetthatthat’sgreatbuttheissuethat’sbeforemerightnowhasalwaysbeen
theunemployment numbersinthiscityandhowdoesthatturnintocrimeandwehaveourfair
shareofit.  UntilIcangetsomeresolvefromwhomeverforanythingfromthisCityabouthow

13

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

wehavebetterpracticesasitrelatestoourracialdisparitiesIcannotcontinuetogivemysupport
to. Henrycannotdothat. Forthedistricttoo.    

CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic- IcantellyoufrompersonalexperiencethatMr. Bartels’ fatherwas
moreconcernedaboutminorityhiringandhiringthehandicappedthananypersoninSouthBend.  
Icanalsotellyouthattheirstorewillpaymillionsofdollarsintaxes. HisstoresinSouthBend,  
Mishawaka, inSouthernMichigan, inElkhart, andalloverthecommunity.  SoIapplaudhimon
hisefforts.  AsMarkNealsaidtheyaregreatCitypartners.  YoucancountonthemandIthink
weshouldcontinuetosupportthem.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- IcanhavesomeonefromMartin’scomeup? Canyouclarifyone
issueformeandthatiswiththegate.  Iheardtherewasagateatoneofyourotherstores. Isthere
anyreasonwhythatoptioncan’tbeutilized?  Andifitworksitworksandifdoesn’tworkyoucan
openitupsimilartohowyoudidoveratUniversityorwhateverthatstorewas. Isthereanyreason
thatthetwocan’tbesimilar?   

RobertBartels- Idon’tobjecttotheidea.  ButIdonotwanttobeherenegotiatingspecificthings
withoutatrafficstudyandhavingdatainfrontofus.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- I’mcoolwiththat.   

RobertBartels- Ithinkfirstit’ssteponeandthenitssteptwo. Idon’twanttogetintoadesign
discussiononthespecifics.  Idon’tknowhowtorespondtothatbest.  IftheCitywantsacrash
gatethereandasksusforacrashgatetherewewillcertainlyconsiderit. Imightalsothen; I’m
goingtolosemytemper.  Ithinkwe’reinthedetailsofsomethingwedon’tfullyhaveinformation
about.  Whenwedowewillrespondtoit.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- We’vetalkedonthephoneandI’vebeenovertoyouroffice.  You
havetounderstandwhereweareat.  AsabusinesspersonIrespectwhatyou’vedoneandyour
fatherandeverythingelse.  Also, asagovernmentleaderIgetaskedthesequestionsokay?  I’m
notinyourshoesandyou’renotinmine.  Idon’twanttolosemytemperonpeoplewhentheycall
meeither.  Whenpeopleaskmeandtheysendmeletterstheyhavearightformetoaskthis
questiontoyou. Becausethat’snotgoodqualityserviceyouunderstandthatofallpeople. IfIgo
off onthepeoplewhentheysendmealetterandthenIgetmadatthemandlosemytemper
becausesentmepackages, packages, andpackageslikemydearfriendhasdone, Ihavetoaskher
question. So, Iamjusttellingyou, Ibeingverystraightwithbecauseyousaidthat.  Iamtaking
thetimeherebecausethisismydistrict. WhenIdrivedownthereIhavebeenstoppedbymany
peoplewhenIwashmycarI’mbeingstoppedforthelastthree (3) monthsontheissue. Ihaveto
havetheseanswers. I’mallsupportiveofwhatyou’redoingbutIhavetolivewithmypeople.  
YouworktherebutIlivethere. That’swhatI’msayingI’mverygladthatyou, webothdon’t
knowthetrafficstudybutIjustwanttomakeitclearthatwhenthetrafficstudycomesthatit’son
thetablethatyouwouldbewillingtodolikeyou’vedoneinotherplaces. That’sallI’masking.  
Thereisnoneedforbothofustoloseourtemperonthat.   

RobertBartels- Puttingthegateupiscertainlyonthetable. Maybewemakeacommitmentto
talkingaboutthisinsix (6) monthsafterthestoreisopen. Iammoreinterestedinrespondingtoa
problemthatreallyexists. Iftheproblemdoesn’treallyexistthenwhypretendlikeitexists. If
thereisaproblemwiththatgatesix (6) monthsafterwecanpickadateandhaveallthefolksthat
showedatthefirstmeeting, invitewidely, Iamintocustomerserviceandweareonthesameteam.  
Iwantthebestcustomerservice. Iwantthesafestcustomerexperience.  Iwanttherightkindof
thinghappeningintheneighborhood.  Ifsomethingbadishappeningwearemorethancommitted
torespondingtoit. That’sthepictureIwastryingtoshowyoubefore. Soperhaps, wecangiveit
anopportunitytobreathealittleandletalittleoftheemotionalcomponent, alittleofthefeelings
comeoffthisissueandthenreengageit. Iamfullywillingtodothat, infact, I’dbeafoolnotto.  
Westandfordoingtherightthingsfortherightreasonseverytimewecan.  Soperhapsthattype
ofcommitmentiswelcomed.    

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Iappreciatethat. YouandIhavebeenatareaplantogetherandall
thesuddentheneighborscametheyfilledthisroomupwithareaplan.  We’vebeenatthisfora
whilesoIjustappreciateit.  Ijustwantedeverybodyintheneighborhoodtoknowthatyouhave

14

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

thatcommitment, Ihavethatcommitment, theyhavethatcommitment, andnowwecanmove
togetherasateam. Nowwecaneatatyourplace. Thankyou.   

CommitteeofWholeChairpersonWhite- Wewouldlikethankeveryonecouncilmembers, public,  
presenters, petitionerforyourinput, andforaddressingquestionsthatpertaintothisveryimportant
projectinourcommunity.  IdoknowthatMartin’saregoodpartners; Ihadtheopportunityto
workwiththemwhenIUhousingfirstwasopeningup. Weareabletoworkwiththreeentities:  
TheState, Mishawka, SouthBendandIUSBtobringaboutchange. Intermsatlookingatwhat
wouldbebestnotonlyforMartin’sbutalsoforthestudentsweserved. Iamveryconfidentaswe
moveforwardthatwewillbeabletodothesameforthiswonderfulsite. Iwouldliketothank
Martin’sforyourcommitmentandyourinvestmentinourcity. Ilookforwardtothegrand
opening.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavismadeamotionsendBill34-15tothefullcouncilwithafavorable
recommendationandsetthethirdreadingforOctober12. CouncilmemberDr. Ferlicsecondedthe
motionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofsix (6) ayesandone (1) nayCouncilmemberHenryDavis
Jr.  

44-15

SECONDREADINGOFTHEBILLFORTRANSPOBUDGET

CouncilmemberWhiteChairperson, PersonnelandFinanceCommittee, reportedthattheymet
thisafternoononthisbillandduetoalackofquorumthereisnorecommendation.  

DavidCanganyGeneralManagerofTranspo (Presenter) - I’mgoingtogooverour2016annual
budget.  Thisisprobablythefourthyearthatwe’vecomebeforetheCommonCouncilbasedon
achangeinIndianaCodethatrequiresustocomebeforeoneofourgoverningauthoritiesas
opposedtoourboardofdirectorsasweareamunicipalcorporationreceivingtaxdollarsto
operateoursystem. The2016budgetataglanceisjustshyof11milliondollars.   The2016
budgetisbalanced, thatisalwaysgreatnewstostartouttheyearonalevelplayingfield. The
mostimportantthingisthatwearemaintainingtheservicelevelfrom2015andourpassengers
willseenodecreaseinservice.   

Whenyoulookatourexpenses, almostninetypercent (90%) ofourexpensesare (inaudible)  
throughcontractsespeciallyonthewageside.  Withourbargainingunitworkforceabout
seventy-two (72%) ofthatistiedupinwagesandbenefits. Thatisthroughathree (3) year
agreementwehavetheAmalgamatedTransitUnionLocal #996. Wedohavealittlebitofan
increaseplannedforouroperatingexpensesthiscomingyearbutagainwearemakingithappen.   
Thelaborexpensesaregoingupslightly.  Wejustfinallyreachedanagreementwithour
bargainingunitworkforceonanexpiredcontactwehad. Weareexcitedtohavethatresolution
sowecanthenplanforthecomingyears; thenextthree (3) yearsarelockedinthecontractwith
ourunion. Dentalandhealthinsurancearethesamekindofthingwekeeptalkingaboutyear
afteryearwecomebeforeyou, we’reworkingwithourworkforcetolookatoptions.  This
contractthatwejustwentthroughwithouremployeeswenegotiatedandwe’llhopefullysee
somelevelingoffonourhealthinsurance.     

Unfortunately, withthehealthcarereformwe’veseenquiteabitofincreaseoverthelastfew
yearsinregardstohealthinsurance. Fuel, thisisoneareawherewearegoingtoseeadecrease
forthe2016calendaryeartothetuneofalmostfor $400, 000byconvertingourfleetfrom
traditiondieseltocompressednaturalgas. TodateTranspohastakendeliveryofsixteen (16)  
brandnewbuses. Theyareoutinserviceandit’sgreattobepayingone (1) dollarpergallon
versusthealmostthree (3) dollarsagallonwehadbeenpayinginthepastforfuel.  Whenyou
lookatourrevenue, weareverylimitedinwherewecankindofpullmoneyinfrom.  Wehavea
lotofdifferentareasbutwe’relimitedinhowwecanleveragethoseareas.  Oneoftheareasthat
we’vebeenincreasingrevenueinandreallysomethingthatwedonotwanttodobutis
somethingwehavetodoinordertokeepourservicerunningisbytakingFederalOperating
Assistance, soessentiallydollarswe’dbeusingtomakecapitalimprovementssuchasbuynew
vehicles, buses, andthingslikethat, we’vebeenconvertingthoseovertooperatethesystemon.   

15

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

Thisissomethingthathasbecomepopularamongtransitagenciesaswe’vesinceseendeclining
stateandlocalrevenuesources.  Itissomethingthatwecontinuetodotokeepthebandaidonso
wedon’thavetoraisefares.  Whenyouoperateasystemthatismainlyusedmosttransit
deficientindividualskeepingthefarelowisoneofthemostimportantthings. Weanticipatea
slightuptickinrevenueandthat’sfromachangewemadeinourfarestructure. Thenormalcash
faretorideabusisone (1) dollarandthatremainsthesameasithasforseveralyears. Therewill
benoincreaseinourfare.    

Propertytaxesiswherewereceivequiteabitofouroperatingrevenueaswell.  Weareshowing
justaslightincreaseinthatarea. Stateoperatingassistanceisanareawe’vetakenquitea
significanthitinoverthelastcoupleofyears.  ActuallyTranspo’stakenoveraone (1) million
dollarhitinthedollarswereceivefromthestateofIndianathroughthepublicmasstransitfund.  
Thisisthefirstyearinquitesometimethatwewillseeanincrease.  Itissmallabout $36,000
butanythinghelps.  OurhardeffortsoflobbyingdowninIndianapolisarestartingtopayoff.  
Thisisourfederaloperatingassistancethelastcoupleofyearsinordertomaintainservicewe’ve
beenconvertingovercapitaldollarsasImentioned. Weareprettymuchmaxedoutonfederal
operatingassistanceofthe2016fiscalyear. Itleavesalotofquestionaboutwhatwillultimately
happenin2017. Someofourchallengesthisyearandintheyearaheadistocontinuetopurchase
revenueservicevehiclesornewbuses.  Weoperateoneoftheoldfleetsofvehiclesinthestate
ofIndiana, whichmeansitcostalotofmoneytooperatethosevehicles.    

Wearerunningabusthathasanaverageusefullifeoftwelve (12) yearsbutwhenit’sfifteen
15) yearsolditbecomesverycostlytomaintainthatvehicle. Wearegoingtocontinuetolearn
howtoweatherthestormofuncertaintyofourfederalfundingprogram.  AstheCongresskeeps
extendingitthroughcontinuousresolutionsinsteadoffindingsomesortofdefinitiveanswerto
that.  Thesamewiththestate.  ThefolksinthelegislatureandtheGovernor’sOfficeunderstand
theimportanceoffundingpublictransportation.  We’reworkingveryhardtocontrolour
expensesandbegoodstewardsofthetaxpayerdollars. Wearealsocontinuingtodevelopaplan
toweatherthestormofuncertainty, forthe2017propertytaxcapisveryclosetous.  In2016we
willcontinuetoworktowardourdesignatedstopprogram.  Ithastakenalittlelongerthanwe
hadhopedforbutwearegettingalotofgreatthingsoutofthewayaswell.  Wearecontinuing
toworkandexpandouropportunitieswithlocaluniversitiesandeducationalorganizations.  One
ofthethingswearedoingiswearelookingtoIvyTechforworkforcedevelopment.  Wehavea
veryagingworkforceaswell.  Fortypercent (40%) ofourworkforceiseligibletoretirewithin
thenextfour (4) years. Itmakesitveryhardtoreplaceemployeesthathavebeenwithyour
organizationfortwenty (20), thirty (30), evenforty (40) years. It’stoughtogetfolkswhoeven
wanttocomeanddoareallythanklessjobofdrivingabusandgettingourfolksinour
communitywheretheyneedtogo. ThenasImentionedouragingbusfleet.  Wejustsigneda
five (5) agreementwithamanufacturertobuybusesfrom. Ourboardjustapprovedthatfive (5)  
yearagreementaswellasthepurchaseofuptosix (6) newbusesthisyear.  We’recontinuingto
workhardonmaintainingouragingfleetbutreplacingthatagingfleet. Thehardestissueis
comingupwiththatlocalmatch. We’retaxedonthedollarsthatwehavetospend. Weare
requiredtocomewithatwentypercent (20%) localmatchtopurchaseanynewvehiclesorany
capitalwemighthave.  Weareworkingcreativelytomakethathappenthroughcompetitive
grantsandotherthings. ThatistheTranspobudgetfor2016.   

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite – Asksforquestionsfromthecouncil.   

CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic- Sofiftypercent (50%) ofyourmoneycomesfromeitherthestateor
federalfundsbasically?  That’satoughnuttocrackifthestatecutsbackandfedcutsback.  
Right?   

Presenter- Correct.  

CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic- Thinkpeoplehavetorealizethat. You’resubsidizingfiftypercent
50%) sothat’satoughproblem.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Isthatatypicalorstandardnumberacrosstransitagenciesacross
thecountry?  Arewehigherorarewerightinthemiddlewhenitcomestobeingatfiftypercent
50%)?   

16

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

Presenter- Actuallymosttransitagenciesseemorelocalinvolvementwhetherthat’sonthecity
orcountylevel.  That’ssomethingthatTranspo’sgoingtohavetostartlookingatisleveraging
thoserelationshipsifyouwillintofindingnewwaystofindfundingtoshowthatourcommunity
istrulyinvestedinpublictransit.  Itisnotjustafederalorstateresponsibility. InIndianapolis
thatisahugethingthatwealwayshavetodefendisthatthereislocalinterestinfundingpublic
transit.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Whatdoyoumeanthatmostplaceshavelocalandcommunity
supportversuswhatwehaveatTranspo?   

Presenter- It’sadirectdisbursementfromtheCityorCountyGeneralFundorwhetherit’sa
salestax.  WeareverylimitedintheStateofIndianaunfortunatelywithhowwecancollectour
taxestofundtransitagencies.  Rightnowwecouldn’tgototheballotwithaninitiativetoadda
pennytothesalestax, that’ssomethingthatisverypopularinothercommunities. Thelegislature
justallowsIndianapolisorthecentralIndianaregiontodoit.  Theyaregoingtotheballotwithit
2016.  Sothatisoneofthethingsthatatthestatelevelishowdowebringthatthroughoutthe
entirestateandgettingfolkstounderstandtherealbenefitoftransit. It’snotjustgettingfolks
frompointAtopointB. It’swhenyougoandgetthatcupofcoffeeinthemorninghowdidthat
persongetthere?  Orwhenyoulookatthecomponentsonavehiclewherearetheymade?  Most
ofthecomponentsonatransitbuscomefromourstate. It’shelpingfolkstounderstandthatand
gettingthemtounderstandthatbymakingthatinvestmentitpaysoffaswell.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis-  CanyousendtothisCouncilalistofallthecitieswhohave
transit, intheStateofIndiana, thataregettingfundsfromtheircityand/orcounty? Couldyou
brieflyexplainwhereweareatwithregardstoourfeesintermsofothercities, especiallycities
oursize. Intermofourrates, whatisourcurrentrateandwheredoesthatstandintermsoffees?     

Presenter- We’reone (1) dollarperride. Weareoneofthelowestinthestate. Theonlycitythat
islowerthanusisMuncieandthey'reat $0.75. Everybodyelseisatleastadollarormore.  
Indianapolisisat $1.75cashfare, Lafayetteissignificantlyhigher, andEvansvilleisevenmuch
higher. Wearestillagreatbargainforourpassengers.  Byintroducingadaypassyoucanride
theentireTransposystembythroughouttheentiredayforthreedollars. Thatissomethingnew
weintroducedthisyear.  Weareseeingourpassengersaregettingareallygoodvaluewiththat.  
Thepassisactuallybeingusedaround4.6timesforeachpass.  Itjustshowsthatfolksare
actuallysavingmoneybybuyingthatpass, thatgettingridofthetransferswasactuallyagood
thingforourpassengers.    

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Canyousendusthatlisttootoseewhatothermunicipalitiesare
helpinglocally.   

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- WewillnowmoveintothePublicHearingportion.   

ThisbeingthetimeheretoforesetforthePublicHearingontheabovebill, proponentsand
opponentsweregivenanopportunitytobeheard.  

TherebeingnoonepresentwishingtospeaktotheCouncilinfavoroforoppositiontothisbill,  
CouncilmemberOliverDavismadeamotiontocontinueBill44-15intheCouncilportiononly
onOctober12 andschedulea3 readingthatthesameday.   CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic
secondedthemotionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

thrd

CouncilmemberWhiterequestedamotionforthepurposeofpublichearingofBills41-15, 42- 
15, 43-15toallbeheardtogether. CouncilmemberGavinFerlicmadethemotion.  
CouncilmemberTimScottsecondedthemotionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

41-15

PUBLICHEARINGONABILLOFTHECOMMONCOUNCILOFTHE
CITYOFSOUTHBEND,  INDIANA,  AMENDINGCHAPTER16,  
SECTIONS16-6AND16-8OFTHESOUTHBENDMUNICIPALCODE
TOADJUSTFEESFORCITYCOLLECTIONANDDISPOSALOF
REFUSE (SOLIDWASTE) MATERIALS

17

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

42-15

43-15

PUBLICHEARINGONABILLOFTHECOMMONCOUNCILOFTHE
CITYOFSOUTHBEND,  INDIANA,  AMENDINGCHAPTER16,  
SECTIONS16-6AND16-8OFTHESOUTHBENDMUNICIPALCODE
TOADJUSTFEESFORCITYCOLLECTIONANDDISPOSALOF
REFUSE (SOLIDWASTE) MATERIALS
PUBLICHEARINGONABILLOFTHECOMMONCOUNCILOFTHE
CITYOFSOUTHBEND,  INDIANA,  AMENDINGCHAPTER16,  
SECTIONS16-6AND16-8OFTHESOUTHBENDMUNICIPALCODE
TOADJUSTFEESFORCITYCOLLECTIONANDDISPOSALOF
REFUSE (SOLIDWASTE) MATERIALS

CouncilmemberWhiteChairperson, PersonnelandFinanceCommittee, reportedthattheymet
thisafternoononBills41-15, 42-15, and43-15andduetoalackofquorumthereisno
recommendation.  

MayorPeteButtigieg; Officesonthe14thFloor (Presenter) - Iwillbebriefbeforeturningitover
toJohnMurphyandmyothercolleagues. Iwanttobeginthiswithabigthankyouto
ChairpersonWhiteofthecommittee, thecouncilmembers, andcouncilleadership, and
everybodythathashadahandinbringingthebudgettogether. IbroughtacopybecauseIthink
it’simportantforthepublictohaveafeelforjusthowmuchinformation, muchdata, andhow
muchworkisinvolvedinthebudgetthatouradministrationispresentingtonight.  Tonight’s
hearingisthenextstepinaprocessthathasincludednine (9) publicmeetingswithcouncil
membersaswellasthree (3) publicpresentationstocommunicatethebudgetstrategyandits
contents. Iwanttothankthemembersofourdepartmentthathaveworkedtoprovideadeeper
andfullerinformationrequestedtoshedlightonmanydetailsthatcouncilmembershave
expressedinterestin.   Thatprocessiscontinuing.  Werespondedtoapproximatelytwo-hundred
200) questionssofarandforwardedthree-hundredandseventy-six (376) pagesofinformation
lasttimeIchecked.  Iknowthisreflectsbothcouncilmembersdoingtheirduediligenceonneeds
tounderstandwhatwe’reproposingbevotedonaswellasrelayingquestionsforconcernedand
interestedmembersofthepublicandsowecontinuetoworktogatheranyinformationneeded
forthevotethatisscheduledforthe12 ofOctober.      

th

Today’sbudgetistryingtobalancetheneedsandresourcesofthecommunitywhilekeeping
SouthBend’sfiscalstrengthintact. ThefocusistocontinueSouthBend’sextraordinarycome
backineconomicandcivilterms, whilemakingsurethebenefitsofthisgrowtharefeltbyevery
familyandeveryneighborhoodinthecity. Thatwasexceptionallychallengingthisyearbecause
propertytaxrevenuehasnotsubstantiallyincreased.  ForthatreasonIinstructedevery
departmentsupportedbypropertyincometaxestoprepareabudgetwithasclosetozeropercent
0%) netgrowthaspossible.  Theywereabletodothiswhileofferingatwopercent (2%) raise
andabsorbingatwentypercent (20%) increaseinhealthcarecostswithoutmajorcutsto
personnelwhichisacredittothoseefforts.   

Muchofwhatyouaregoingtoseeinthebudgettodayisreflectingontheneedtocontinue
deliveringonwhathasworkedinrecentyears.  Youwillseechangesinordertobuildoutareas
webelieveweneedtobuildmoreinclusion, innovation, andsustainability. Ijustwanttosaya
briefstatementaboutthatbeforesendingitoverforfullpresentation.     

WhenitcomestoinclusionIwanttoemphasizethatthisbudgetcontainsastrategyfor
addressinganissuethathasbeenoneverybody’smindrecentlythatisdiversityandinclusionin
ourworkforcesandCityoperations.  Theworkforcemadegainsandwemaybeaheadofsomeof
ourneighborsbutwearestillalongwaytogobeforeweareabletosayourworkforcereflects
thecommunityitserves. Sothat’sthereasonthatweseekinthisbudgettocreatethepositionof
adiversityandinclusionofficer.  HavingtakenonboardinputfromtheCouncilweareasking
thatthisbeinstalledasadirectreporttotheMayor’sOfficeinordertomakesureithasCity- 
widevisibilityandauthority.    

Therearetwo (2) pillarstothestrategythatwillbeoverseenbythisoffice.  Oneisvendors, this
istakinguptheworkthatpreviouslyhadbeendonebythecomplianceofficerandwould
continuetobeguidedbytheutilizationboardandemployees.  Wherewecancontinuetogrowin
hiringandrecruitinguppermanagementpractices, Iwouldexpecttheincumbentinthisposition

18

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

tospendthebulkofhisorhertimeonpublicsafety, giventheheightenedinterestinthepublic
andontheCouncilinmakingsurethatournextgenerationofpublicsafetyofficersareas
diverseandreflectiveofthecommunityaspossible.  Thiswillalsobeastrategicadvisorforthe
administrationandwillbeaskedtoengageinprofessionalserviceasnecessary. Ialsowantto
drawattentiontothecreationofanHRpositionwithafocusonpublicsafety.  Thisposition
whileitisaboutmorethandiversitycertainlyitisourexpectationthatitisgoingcreate
processesthatbetterestablishanddocumentthemeritbasisorpromotionandpersonnel
decisionsinthePoliceandFireDepartments, whichwebelievewillhelptoensureand
demonstratethebasisforthosedecisions.    

ExpandingopportunityisalsoareasonweareaskingthatMunicipalIDsbeincludedinthis
budget. Ijustwanttobeclearaboutwhereweareintheprocess.  Webelievethateveryresident
willbebetteroffifitispossibletobeacardcarryingresidentofSouthBend. Wearestill
designingthedetailsoftheprogram.  Weareencounteringalotofaspectsofthisprogramthat
needtobethoughtthrough. Wearesufficientlycommittedtotheprocessandtheconceptthatwe
arebudgetingfornow.   Inotherwordsit’snecessarytohavethosefundsinthebudgetinorder
tobeabletorollouttheprocesswhenthetimecomes. It’sbudgetedforconservativelyasyou’ll
seeinthepresentation.  Andwethinkit’sgoingtobetherightthingtodo. Iprobablyshouldjust
restatethatforanumberofpeoplewhoareherespecificallyonthatissue. (Inaudiblespokenin
Spanish) ThisisnotavoteontheIDcardsthiswouldleadwhenthebudgetisactedontohaving
theresourcestodoitwhenthetimecomes.  Iknowtherearealotofpeoplehereinterestedin
that.  OverallaswasstatedwhenIfirstcamebeforeCouncilearlierthisyeartodiscussthe
budgetthesinglebiggestcategoryofexpenseispublicsafety, followedbyeconomic
development.  Includingcontinuingtoplanforvibrantneighborhoods, withinvestmentinvacant
properties, LightUpSouthBendandCurbsandSidewalks. Also, tryingtoincreaseourabilityto
connectresidentstotheeconomicopportunitiesthataretakingplaceincludingincreasinglabor
forceparticipation. Ialsowanttoreemphasizewhatwearetryingtodowithcompensation.   
RaisingtheminimumwageforourCityemployeesto $10.10overthenextthree (3) yearsand
usingefficiencygainsincreaseandatthesametimehavinganacrosstheboardincreaseinthe
salarymaximumfornon-bargainingpositions. Wearecontinuingtoinvestinqualityoflifein
ourparksandwe’retryingtobemoreefficientthroughinnovationwhichiswhywe’llcontinue
robustfundingforinnovationandtechnology. LastbutnotleastIdowanttoemphasizeour
determinationtosustainSouthBend’ssuperiorAAcreditrating.  Thathappensasaresultofthe
toughdecisionsthatthisCouncilandthepreviousAdministrationhavemade.  Wearecontinuing
tomakethechoicesthatwebelieveputusonasustainablepaththroughthelongrun. Iwillleave
toJohnandcolleaguestoofferthedetailpresentation. BeforeIstepawayfromtheChamberI
wantedtoseeifthereareanyquestionsaboutthestrategyorphilosophyofthebudgetthatison
thecouncilmembers’ mindsatthistimebeforeproceeding.    

CommitteeoftheWholeChairperson- IwillgostraightdowntherollCouncilmemberHenry
DavisJr.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - MayorsogladtoseeyoutodayandIappreciateyourpresence
todayatthismeeting.  IhavebeenpayingattentionandIhavebeenatallbutone (1) budget
hearing. Iwasinthebackearlieraskingsomeofmycolleaguesabouttheirfeelingsaboutthe
budgetprocess.  Ihavecometounderstand, justforme, thatithasbeenaverydifficult
realizationforthelackofvisionthathasbeenputforthastothereasonortherequestsofmany
departments.  IwasreluctanttohearthevisiontowhyeachdepartmentwasaskingforX-amount
ofdollarsforthenextyear. InconclusiontowhatmycolleaguesandIweretalkingaboutitjust
soundslikethatit’sgoingtobethesamethingthathappenedlastyearthatwilloccurthisyear,  
sobusinessasusual.  Myquestionbecauseyoucontinuetotalkaboutdiversityeachyearthe
numbersindiversityhavefallenasatotalCityworkforce, yearone (1), yeartwo (2), andyear
three (3) aswell.  Ifwe’regoingtobelookingtocreateafundorcreateapositionasitrelatesto
diversitywillyouallowtheCouncilwhenitcomestothedecisiontobeapartoftheprocess
whenitcomestochoosingwhothatpersonis? Iaskthatbecauseyou’renumbershavenot
proventomatchuptowhatyousayyouwanttodo.  Itisundeniableit’sinthenumbers. Iam
askingbecausewegetthequestions, Idon’tparticularlyknowifyougetquestionslikeweget
them.  WetendtogetpointedasthefaultoftheCityandIfindthattobeunfairbecausewedon’t
haveit. Thenpeoplesayweneedamorediversifiedworkforce, weneedtoseepeoplethatlook

19

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

likeusthatworkintheCity.  Butwedon’thavethesaysoinwho’sbeenhiredandthenweget
blamedforthepeoplewhoarenotbeinghired.   

MayorButtigieg (Presenter) - Iwouldsaytheseparaterolesofthelegislativeandexecutivepoint
totheexecutive, inthiscasetheMayor. OrleadbytheMayororbeingresponsibleforpersonnel
decisionsincludinghiring.  Thatbeingsaid, Icertainlywelcomeinput, views, andanyvisionthat
membersoftheCouncilwouldliketocontribute.  Thisisaveryimportantissue.  It’sonethat
callsforinputandviewsfromthroughoutthecommunity.  Therearefewpeoplebetter
positionedtoofferthatthanmembersoftheCouncil.  Thatinputiswelcome. Thoughofcourse
thefinaldecisionwithanyhiringprocessrestswithintheexecutivebranch.    

CouncilMemberHenryDavisJr. - Iunderstandthatbutweonlyhavetoapprovethemoneyso
thatyoucanhirethatperson.  Iamaskingforasharedinterestinthis, Sir.  Thisisnotmeantto
beasparringmatchbutifwe’reapprovingthemoneytosupportthehiringoftheseindividuals
andwe’reasking, I’maskingthatwehaveaseatatthetablesothatwecangetthebestpersonor
thebestpeoplethatworkattheCitylevel.  Thereisnoreasonifyouarenotinterestedto
approveitwedon’tgetwhatweneedoutofit, fortheresidentsofSouthBend. Themunicipal
IDissueaswell, Ihadabillthatwasfiledandobviouslyyouaretryingtonotdoapolicychange
beforemunicipalID. I’veseenitworkincitiessuchasRichmond, Ca, wheretherewaspolicy
changethatwasdoneanditwentwithaneducationalcomponent.  Thatallowseverybodyto
understandexactlywhatisgoingonbecausepeoplehaveallthesemixedviewsabout
immigration, etc.  Again, sharedinterestagainweareaskingbecauseweareabitconfusedon
the $18,000intheprogrambecausewestilldon’tknowandjustsaidaswell.  Inapproving
18,000foraprogramthatweknownothingaboutagain, Sir, thatisbitfarfetched.  Asamatter
offact, Iknowitis.  IntheinterimI’maskingthatweshareintheplanningofthatforthe
bettermentofthecitizens.  Areyouinterestedinthat?   

MayorButtigieg (Presenter)- Iwouldabsolutelywelcomeaproposalfromyouoranyother
memberastowhatdetailsyouwouldliketoseeincludedaswemakeourdecisionabouthowto
designtheprogram.  Whatweareaskingforhereisfundingtheprogramandmakingsurethat
theresourcesaretherewhenthetimecomestoimplementit.  Therearedifferentmodelsofhow
todoamunicipalIDprogram, somecallforanordinancesomedonot. Ithinkthatregardlessof
whatversionisgoingtotakeplaceheremoreCouncilinputcanbeexpectedwhenever
appropriate.  Whatwearereallylookingforhereistomakesure, sincethisisourone (1) timeof
theyearwhenwedobudgetinginregularorderthatthefundstodoitareinplace.  Theroleof
theCouncilistodecidewhethertoallowthattobepossiblebyfundingitornotfundingit. The
roleoftheadministrationwillbedesignthepolicyinputfromanymembersofthepublic,  
especiallycouncilmemberswouldbewelcomeanytime.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - Mylastquestionisthis: Whyhaven’twemovedpasttaxbase
expansiononlytoTIFdistricts? IamseeinganabsorbentamountofattentionbeingpaidtoTIF
districtsIknowtherealityisbecauseofthesupportoftheTIFdistricttoinfrastructure
improvementetc. publicorprivatepartnershipsbutwearelosingthebattlewhenitrelatestothe
generalrevenuefortheoldpartoftheCityortheCitywherealotoftheneighborhoodsareat
that’snotintheTIFdistricts. IsthereaplaninplacebecauseIdidn’tnecessarilyseeitinthe
budgetthatisgoingtohelpintroduceanexpansivetaxbasewithinareasthatarenotinTIF
districts?    

MayorButtigieg (Presenter) - Theintentionofoureconomicdevelopmentistoexpand
opportunityineverypartoftheCity.  Naturallyyouaregoingtobeseeingmoreeconomictools
beingusedinTIFdistrictsbecausethat’swherethosetoolsare.  That’swhereweareableto
makecontributionsunderthelawusingfundsthataretargetedforuseinredevelopmentareas. I
certainlydon’tthinkthattheonlyplacewecanmakeadifferenceisinthoseTIFdistricts.  I
thinkyou’llseethatbothasyoureviewthisbudgetandasyoulookattheoverallplanningthat
wearedoing.   ThatweareveryoftenworkinginareasthatarenotinTIFdistricts.  So, yesthat
isalwayspartofourplan.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - Weareworkinginpartsofthecitynotnecessarilycreatinga
taxbaseortaxableland. WorkingatacemeterythatisnotintheTIFdistrictorrightoutsidethe
TIFdistrictisnotnecessarilyanexpansionofthetaxbase.  Igetthat, Iamaskingabouttaxable

20

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

newdevelopmentinoldpartsoftheCityorpartsoftheCitythat’snotintheTIFdistrict.  
Taxablelandnotourworkingorshareinterestwithanothernon-profitthat’soutsideoftheTIF
district.  IamlookingatbeingabouttoexpandtaxablelandoutsideoftheTIFdistrict.   

MayorButtigieg (Presenter)- The300milliondollarsinprivateinvestmentthathascometothe
cityindealsthatwe’vehavebeeninvolvedwithsincetakingofficehaslargelygoneintothattax
basethatweareconcernedwith.  Ihaven’tseenabreakdownofhowmuchthatfallswithinthe
bordersoflandthatmarkedoffinaTIFdistrict.  Obviously, youcanexpectthatmanyofthe
areasofgreatestneedaregoingtobeintherethat’swhytheywereintheTIFdistrictinthefirst
place. Theremaybetimeswhenit’sappropriatetorevisittheboundariesoftheTIFdistrictas
theCouncilhasaskedtodoanddidlastyearcreatingmoreopportunities.  ParticularlytheTIF
districtsthatcoverthemajorityoftheWestsidewhereyouseesomuchoftheincreaseinthe
impactbaseassociatedwiththeinvestmentsofrealpersonalandprivateandpersonalproperty
throughthebusinessdealsthathavetakenplacesofar.   

CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic- FromthepublicsafetyaspectMayor, we’vebeenlongtimeinvested
inaminorityrecruitmentofficerandIknowitalwaysdoesn’tcorrelatewiththemetricsthatthe
Ferguson, Missouri, versusBaltimorebutitisjustcommonsensethatweneedamore
diversifiedPoliceandFireDepartment. Whatistheexactroleyouaregoingtohaveaminority
recruitmentofficer, correctorjustpublicsafety?    

MayorButtigieg- TheintentionistohaveadiversityandinclusionofficerfortheCityofSouth
Bend.   Ithinkthatit’sthecasethatthebulkofthatindividual’stimeintheearlylifeofthat
positionwillgointoPublicSafety.  Ithinkaswe’vedevelopedthisconceptithasbecomeclear
thattherehasbecomeaneedforstrategicsupport.  Thatthisneedstobesomebodywhoisable
toreportdirectlytotheMayor’sOfficeandtohavepurviewoverastrategyfortheCity.   
RecognizingagainthatthebulkofwherethatcashisatisgoingtobeinthePublicSafety
departments. ThenwhatyouaregoingtoseeisthatotherpositionthatHRpositionwhichis
situatedinsuchawaythatitisgoingtofocusonpublicsafety.  We’llalsobeabletobea
multiplierinourabilitytodorecruitingandretentionandbetterprocessmanagement.  These
rolesaredifferent, oneisstrategicandfocusedonHRandprocessmanagementinawayyoucan
seeitaddinguptoafull-timeequivalentoralittlemorethanone (1) full-timepersononpublic
safetywithaviewtowardthediversityofourforce.     

CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic- MostcitiesthatIhaveseenaboutoursizeoralittlelargerhavetwo
orthreepeopledevotedtoit.  Sodoyouthinkonefull-timeequivalentcanhandletheentirejob
description?    

MayorButtigieg- It’llbeone (1) morethanwe’vehad.  Wedon’tthinkthatthat’senoughbut
we’llhavetorevisitthatinnextyear’sbudget.  Idothinkit’llrepresentseriousprogressandthis
alsoiswhywewanttomakesuretherearefundsavailableforprofessionalservicestoaugment
theabilityofthein-housepersonnelandstaff. TheHRpersonworkingonthatsideofthe
equationandthenstrategicleaderworkingundermyguidancetogetthejobdone.   

CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic- Secondlyyouaskedforsomephilosophicalquestionsaboutthe
future.  Citiesaremadegreatbytheeconomics, schoolsandcrime.  Thosearethethreetriad.   
Haveyouthoughtofbeinginvolvedintheschoolsatallasfarasmayoralappointments?  Isthat
inthefuturebecauseIamnotsurethepresentsystemisworking.    

MayorButtigieg (Presenter) - Iknowthatthedebatecomesupfromtimetotimeaboutthe
structureofourschoolcorporation. ThatprobablyabroaderphilosophicaldebatethanIcan
touchhereatthispoint.  WhatIshouldsayisthiswillcomeupintheshorttermandmedium
term, Ibelievethemostpositivemeaningfulwaythatamunicipalitycaninterveneinsupportin
educationisinthepre-Kgap.  Wehavelargenumberofstudentswhoaremakingitoffthe
Headstartwaitinglist.  Weknowthatisanareawherewecanmakeadifferenceinthelivesofso
manychildrenwhoareheadedintothatK-12system. Myviewpresentlyisthatwouldbemore
bangforourbuckthanattemptingtochangethepoliticalstructureoftheschoolboard.  AgainI
thinktheCityhasahugestakeinsuccessoftheschoolcorporation.  It’sappropriatetorevisit
thatquestionfromtimetotime.   

21

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- GoodeveningMayor.  Iappreciatetheconceptofhavingan
AffirmativeActionpersonintheHRandinthePoliceDepartmentbutIhaveagreatconcern
aboutthat.  Itkindofinmymindwherewearein2015whenyouhaveapersonwhois
dedicatedjustforthatpurposeitfreesthehumanresourcepersontonotdotheirjob.    

Agoodhumanresourcepersonlooksateverybody. TheylookatAfrican-Americans, Polish, and
Hungarian, everybodyandtheydealwiththat. Ithinkourlocalschoolgotintosomeissues.  
Whenyouhavethatone (1) singlepersonoutitcancreatebacklash. Itcanbeperceivedas
reversediscrimination. Agoodthingcanturnouttobealegallybadthingin2015legallaw. I
agreedwithhavingmorepeople.  Ithinkwehavetobecarefulinsayingthisistheaffirmative
actionperson, theyareresponsibleforgettingHispanics, African-Americansandthenthehuman
resourceisnolongerresponsiblefordoingthat. UniversityofMichiganhadproblemswiththat.  
Alotofuniversitiesaregettingsuedandlosingbecauseofthatsameconcept. Sowedon’tget
intomorelawsuits, likewhenoneofourschoolshadafieldtripforallAfrican-American
students.  Wereallyhavetobecarefulwhenusingpublicdollarsjusttotarget. Whatlegal
counselhaveyouconsultedbeforeyouimplementthis?  Tohandlethoseonthefarleftorfar
right. Partly, IthoughtthepositionMs. Peatehaswasgoingtodothatsimilarthingtoo. Itreally
didn’tstirthepotasIhopeditwouldbecausenowwearehereagain.  Nothingagainstherorher
colleagueitjustdidn’tturnoutthewayIthoughtitwould. Whatlegalcounselhavewehad
beforeweputthisintoabudget? Thenit’soffyourhandsandyoucansaythat’swhatthe
Councilvoted. WhatissomethingwecanhavealegalrecommendationfromCristalBriscoto
sayshehasworkedwithLonnieDouglasourHumanRightsCoordinatorthatyoulookedatother
cities, thatyouhavethecaselawthatwillhelpustopresentthistoaveryconservativepublic?    

MayorButtigieg (Presenter) - Iwouldnotbringanyrecommendationtothiscouncilthatour
administrationandlegalteam, ledbyCristalBriscodidnotviewaslegallyappropriate.    

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Canshegiveusadocumenttogiveourcounseli.e. abriefor
summary?  Politicallyit’sgreat, IliveontheSouthwest, tosayIamformunicipalIDsIgotmy
HispanicandAfrican-AmericanitsoundsgreatbutthenIhavetodealwiththerealityofthelaw.   
Therealityofthelawandpublicdollarsisnotalwaysaprettything.  Ihaven’tseenenough
informationforaffirmativeactionpositionsorthemunicipalIDsfromthelegaldepartment. I
wantthatbeforewevoteonthebudget.  Idon’tthink $18,000isenoughandIdon’twantto
pandertopeopleandifwevoteagainstthisbudgetthenit’savoteagainstHispanics. Idon’t’  
wanttothrowacarrotatpeople. Iwanttoknowthelegalramificationoftrafficstops, goingto
thelibrary, thewatercompany, togetanapartment, iftheygoanywherewithacityIDIneedto
knowthelegalramificationsbasedonstate, federallaw, andothercitypractices Howdoesthis
budgeteffecttheSampleSt. andOliveSt. overpassmonies?  Iknowthatisoldmoneythatcame
fromEwingSt. GaryGilotcametoRumVillageandtoldthismoneyhasbeenmoved.  Canyou
giveusasummaryofhowmuchoftheoldmoneyisbeingusedforthatorifitisnewmoney?    

MayorButtigieg (Presenter)- Whenitcomestowhichdollarsareinthereandwhentheywere
encumberedIdon’twanttogetoutofmydepthandaskJohnandErictospeaktothat.  WhatI
willsayisthathaveheardfromyouandothersabouturgencyofgettingsomethingdonethere.  
Wearefortunatetobeabletotakeadvantageofsomefederaldollarsbutnotwithoutasizeable
Citymatch. Iwillflagthatandhopefullyitwillbespokentoalittlebitlater.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- IhavesomeotherquestionsIwillsendtoyou.   

CommitteeoftheWhileChairpersonWhite – Itisimportanttonotewewillbeincommittee
throughouttheprocess.  Wewillhaveampleopportunityforquestionstobeaddressedtomake
surewehaveaclearunderstandingaswemoveforward.   

JohnMurphyController (Presenter) - Iwanttothankourdepartmentheadsandotherfiscal
managers. (Presenterbeganaslideshowpresentation) Thebudgetconsistsofone-hundredand
three (103) funds. GeneralFund, SpecialRevenueFund, DebtServiceCapitalFund, Enterprise
Funds, InternalServiceFunds ( i.e., healthinsurance, centralservices), TrustandAgencyFunds,  
PoliceandFirePensionFunds, andRedevelopmentFundswhichareapprovedthrougha
differentbudgetprocess.  May28wasthebudgetkickoffmeeting.  Weareinourfourth (4)  
month, one (1) moremonthtogo. July31 MayorPeteheldin-depthmeetingswitheach

th

st

22

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

departmentthatwereone (1) tothree (3) hourslong. WehadanumberofpublicPersonneland
FinanceCommitteemeetingsandthree (3) off-sitemeetings.   

st

th

thth

WecompliedwithoutSeptember1 requirementtosubmitadraftbudgettotheCounty. We’ve
advertisedourbudgetintheGatewaystatesystemwhichisalegalrequirement. Todayisour
publichearingonthebudget, wearehopingforabudgetadoptiononOctober12 withabackup
dateofOctober26.  November6 isourdeadline. Five (5) orSix (6) ofourbudgetsthroughthe
GeneralFundareapprovedthroughthestate.  Theycanchangeourbudgetbuttheyhaven’tdone
thatinten (10) years. Revenueandexpendituresummary, ourtotalproposedbudgetfor2016is
304,956,659itisalargebudget.  TheGeneralfund’sbalanceisat $53,852,368. Thatisan
importantfundtobalanceeveryyearandwehave. AsMayorPetementioned, we’vebeen
operatingunderthatthepropertytaxcircuitbreakersince2009, youhaveseenthedownward
slopewhichhasbeendifficulttoworkwith.   

Wearehopingforrelativelymodestincreasesinthenexttwo (2) tothree (3) years. Thereisalso
anissuewithpropertytaxesin2020thatwewillhavetodealwith.  Agoodquestioncameupin
thepublicmeeting, “Whopayspropertytax?” Residentialforty-threepercent (43%) Commercial
twenty-eightpercent (28%) personalpropertytaxfifteenpercent (15%). Whoreceivesproperty
taxes? Citiesandtownsreceivetwenty-eightpercent (28%); St. JosephCountySchoolDistricts
receivetwenty-sixpercent (26%); TIFdistrictsreceivetwentypercent (20%); theCounty
receivesfifteenpercent (15%).  LocalincometaxesourCOIT, LOIT, PublicSafetyLOIT, from
2015-2016ithasbeenchoppybasedonstatedistributionthetrendhasbeenslightlyup. Weare
usingthesefundsforoperatingmorethanweeverusedto. Asthegeneralfundrestrictsweare
usingmoreofthesefunds. Hereisrevenueacrossalllines:  $274,871,262propertytaxes,  
twenty-sixpercent (26%); Chargesforservicesatthirty-sixpercent (36%) wastewater, water,  
parkchargesfees, enterprisefundrelated, localincometax, ninepercent (9%), othertaxesare
fivepercent (5%) (gastax, wheeltaxes, hotel, motel, cigarette, etc.,). Expendituresbyactivity
generaladministrationissixpercent (6%), EconomicDevelopmentiseighteenpercent (18%),  
Utilitiesistwenty-eightpercent (28%), PublicSafetyistwenty-fivepercent (25%).  Wewanted
tobenchmark, itisalwaysgoodtoknowwhereyourpeersareatandthisisbasedontheCAFR
comprehensiveannualfinancialreport).  Generalgovernmentexpenseswerefairlylow
comparedtoGreenBay, WIat $75percapita, thelowestisSouthBend.  Thatisconsideredan
overheadcost, youwanttokeepthatgenerallylow. Expendituresbyfundtype, EnterpriseFunds
arethelargest (water, wastewater, etc.).  Salariesandwages $79,915,000, thatnumberisslightly
lessthan2014by ($465,000), biggestfactorbeingthe27 payrollof2014.  FringeBenefits
increasescostat $29,000,000ortenpercent (10%).  Asummaryfromoneyeartothenext, the
middleisthehighestbecauseweencumberfromprojectsthatareinprogress. Theyrolloverto
thesubsequentyear’sbudgetandthosecanbeanywherefrom $25-30milliondollars.   

th

st

Youcan’tfinisheveryprojectbyDecember31.  That’swhyamendedbudget2015issomuch
higherthantheothers. 1,100budgetedfull-timepositions, four (4) morethan2015, five (5) new
pickersinthepublicworksarea. Anetoffour (4) positions. Headcountbytypepoliceandfire
areeachaboutaquarterofthetotal.  WeareproudoftheDistinguishedBudgetPresentationby
theCityAward, beingone (1) ofonlytwo (2) citiesinthestateofIndianatoreceivesuchan
award. WehaveanexcellentAAbondrating. ThestateofIndianahasaAAA; wehavethesame
bondratingasthecityofIndianapolis. Thisisunemploymentfrom2011fromtwelvepercent
12%) downtoaboutsixpercent (6%) basedonnationaltrendsbutalsothehardworkofour
CommunityInvestmentDepartment.   

PrivateinvestmentissignificantlyupthroughJuly2015, alreadysurpassingtheotheryears
2012-2014.  Theoverallcitybudgetis $305,000,000, GeneralFundbudgetof $53,000,000
balanced).  Weaskforfavorableconsiderationofour2016budget.  Thereareanumberof
appendageitems, weemailedthemtoyou, andwewanttomakesureyouareawareofthat.  We
haveabudgetrecap, asummaryofthedatabytypeandactivity, wealsohavethebudgetsfor
eachfund, wealsohaveatrendfrom2008-2016onrevenueandexpenditures. There’salotof
reallydetailedstuffIkindoflikethatsomaybeyou’lllikethataswell.  WiththatI’dliketo
openitupforquestions.   

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- I’dliketostartdowntheroll.   

23

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- DoyouhaveananswertothatquestionIaskedregardingSample
St. andOlive?   

JohnMurphy, Controller (Presenter) - IthinkitisbudgetedinMajorMoves. MajorMovesisa
Cityfund.  Therehasbeensomemoneyin2015-2016forthat.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Doyouknowhowmuchthatiscosting?  

JohnMurphy, Controller (Presenter) - Idon’trememberIwillhavetogetbacktoyouonthat.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Canyousendthattomeinanemail? Canyousendmesome
details?  IsthatfundingcomingfromtheEwingProject?  Iwastoldtherewasmoneycoming
fromtheEwingfundthatwouldmatchupwithCountyfundsbecausetheCountydidn’thave
enoughmoneytodoit. TheCitydoesn’tdobridges, we’regoingtodoajointthing. Iwanttosee
ifthisismoneythattheCityputupyearsago.  Thiswasmoneyfrommypredecessorandithas
beenalmostadecadesincethesemonieshavebeenheldtothepeoplethere.   

EricHorvath, DirectorofPublicWorks - Wearegoingthroughthebidprocess.  Iwillsendyou
anemailwithanupdate, whatwe’vespenttodateandwhatourestimatesarerightnowfor
Olive-Samplefortheportionthatisthetwo-bridgestructuresandthetwoapproaches. Weare
doingsomeadditionalworkonOlivewithsomeotherfederalfunds. Forthethree (3) designation
numbersfortheJasnowskiOverpassIwillgiveyouanupdate.  Thosemonieswerebudgetedin
2014. It’saneighty (80) – twenty (20) dollarlocalmatchthatissplitbetweentheCityand
County. Themoneywasn’tmovedfromEwing, theEwingprojectwascancelledoutofthe
federalsystem, thatdidmakemoniesavailableintheMACOGallocationbutitdoesn’t
necessarilymakeitmovedirectlytoanotherCityproject.  Itgoesintoapotthateveryoneapplies
for.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- ItwastoldtousataRumVillagemeetingthatthemoneywould
movetothatproject. Yourpredecessoractuallyoutedthosewordsthatwewouldbemovingthe
moneytothatproject.  That’swhyIusedthatterminology, that’sthewaythepeoplelookatit.  I
understandthelegalities. Wevotedonthisin2014andacertainportionoftheworkwas
supposedtobedonein2014, 2015.  Isthisapartofthe2016budgetatall?  Orjustinthecurrent
andpreviousbudget?   

EricHorvath (PublicWorks) - Wedonotcurrentlyhaveanythinginthe2016budget, except
OlivefromSampletoTucker.  Theapproachworktothebridge, rightbythetracksontheSouth
side.  Wehave $118,000forlocalmatchforfederaldollars.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Thepieceofthe2016budgetisabout $118,000andtherestthose
moniesfortheSampleSt. Bridgeismonieswearealreadyvotedonthe2014and2015years?  

EricHorvath (PublicWorks) - WhatIwillgetisanestimateonthefundsnecessarytocomplete
theprojectforourportionoftheshare. Wewon’tknowuntilwegothroughthebiddingprocess/  
thestateprocessbecauseit’safederalaidproject, thentheywillcometotheCityandCounty
withtheamountnecessary.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Willtherestillbemoniesavailabletodosidewalkrepairsin2016
oristhataone (1) timedeal, wherecouncilmembersthemselvescandesignatelikewedid
before?  

EricHorvath (PublicWorks) - Yes. Itislessmoneythan2015. Thatwasacouncilallocation
program.  Ithinkitwasaround500ft. ofsidewalk.    

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Thatwasinadditiontowhatyouwereplanningtodo?  Wecan
startsubmittingoncethebudgetisapproved?   

EricHorvath (PublicWorks) - Wearejustgoingtosendoutsomeformsthatmakeiteasier.  
Thenwecanfigureouttheallocationsandanyrecommendationswehavewiththat.   

24

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Thisyeartheywerestillsayingcallyourcouncilmen, aboutthe
sidewalkaftertheallocationhadalreadyfinished.  Ihadtoexplaintothepeoplethatour
allocationwasalreadypre-established. Itcreatedalittleissue. Canthatbedealtwith? Whenour
allocationsaredoneitbecomestheroleoftheexecutivebranchasitwasinthefirstplace. How
canthatbeclarifiedthisyearsothatitdoesn’thappenthesamewaynextyear.   

EricHorvath (PublicWorks)- IamnotsureIfullyunderstandthequestion.   

th

CouncilmemberDavis- IntheSixth (6) DistrictIsubmittedforPrairieApartments. However,  
wecalledabouttheCitysidewalkprogramtheywerenotbeingtoldabouttheCitysidewalk
programtheywerebeingtoldtocalltheircouncilmemberbecausethecouncilmemberallocates
moneyfortheirdistrict.  SoIwaswonderinghowtheywerecallingmewhentheyalreadyknew
wehadallocatedourmonies. Especiallyduringelectionseasonitbecameapoliticalnightmare.  
Inthefuturehowcanweclarifythatwealreadyallocatedoursidewalkssothepeopledon’tget
confusedandcalltheircouncilperson.   

EricHorvath (PublicWorks) - Iapologize, thatshouldn’thappen.  Wehadadeadlineandafter
thosedeadlinesthatprogramisgoingtobeclosedfortheyear. Thereimbursementisopenandis
stillopen.  Timeisrunningshortonthat, obviouslytheweather. Thatprogramworkedverywell.   
Thereisanapplicationinourofficeonthe13 floor.   

th

CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic- Slideten (10) youstated, “Whoseespropertytaxesiscity, town,  
school, TIFF, andcountylibraryetc.,” TIFgets $71million, citiesandtownsget $104Million
doesthatmeantheTIF’sgetadisproportionateamountofthepropertytaxes?  Weareforty
percent (40%) TIFinSouthBend, fortypercent (40%) TIFinMishawaka, right?   

JohnMurphy (Controller) - I’mnotsureaboutMishawaka. ThesearethenumbersforSt. Joseph
Countyasawhole, alltheunitsoyoucanevaluatethatasyousee.   

CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic- Itlookslikeitgetsadisproportionateamount.  Follow-upwithit. It’s
kindofaninterestingphenomenon.    

JohnMurphy (Controller) - ItisontheIndianaGatewaypublicaccessportalsoIwould
encourageanycitizentogoonthereandtakealook. Thereisajustatonofbudgetinformation.   

CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic- Slidesixteen (16) youhadbudgetexpendituresbytypeandyouhad
paymentinlieuoftaxes $5.7Millionattwopercent (2%).  Whatisthat?   

JohnMurphy (Controller) - Thatispaymentsforourutilitiestoourselves.  It’snottheothertype
ofpaymentinlieuoftaxesyoumaybefamiliarwithasfarasanon-profit.   

CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic- IstheMayorstillhere?   

JohnMurphy (Controller) - He’supstairs.    

CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic- Thereisaninterestingphenomenon.  TheGovernorofMainehas
proposednon-profitpayfiftypercent (50%) oftheirassessedvalueoftheirproperty.  Paymentin
lieuoftaxes, kindofinteresting.   

CouncilmemberSchey- Youprovidedaprojectedpropertytaxrevenuewithaspikein2019and
thenitgoesbackdownagain, why?  

JohnMurphy- Thisisaprojectionwehadaconsultantdoforus. Withpropertytaxesyouhave
Levy-Rollsquotientit’ssupposedtoprovideacostoflivingincreaseeachyear, itwilloccurin
thenextthree (3) tofour (4) years. Thisisbasedoffofassumptionstheymadebasedontax
raises, othermunicipalitiesinthearea, netassessedvalueandsoforth. Theywillbenefitfrom
Levygrowthquotientincreasesinthenextcoupleyears. Wewouldbehappywiththatpartofthe
chart.   

CouncilmemberSchey- Thesearejustestimatesandobviouslythefutureisalwaysanestimate.   

25

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

JohnMurphyController- It’sanestimateandwetrytobeveryconservativewithourestimates
withourestimatingofpropertytaxes.  Myviewisuntilyouhaveitinthebankyoudonothave
it.   

CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic- Don’tthespecialexemptionsweandLakeCountyhaveexpire?   

JohnMurphy (Controller) - Theyareexpiringin2020.   

CouncilmemberFerlic- That’sthereasonyouhavethedecreaserightthere. We’regoingtoget
hammeredatthattime.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - PublicWorksDirectorEric, youtalkedabouttwo (2) orthree
3) projectsthatyougotfederalfundingfor.  Canyoutalkaboutdollaramounts?   

EricHorvath (PublicWorks) - Icansendyouthat. Idon’tknowthemoffthetopofmyhead.  
ThemoneyforOliveStreetisessentiallySR23Nsoittiesintothisprojectthatwe’redoing
already. Thatwasa $118,000forthelocalmatch. Iwillsendyouthefederaldollarsonallof
that. BolandTrailsRun, BendixDrive, federaldollarsforSafeRoutetoSchoolincludes:  
Lincoln, Pearly, Coquillard, andHarrisonschools. Wehaveanumberofprojectsthatdohave
federaldollarsinvolved.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - Itsoundsextensiveanditsoundgood.  Iappreciateyourwork
inlocatingthosedollarstohelpimproveourinfrastructure.  Myquestionisbecausetheyare
federaldollarstheycomewithfederalmandatesforwhoworksontheprojects.  Whowillbe
enforcingthoselaws?   Makingsurethatfederallawitselfisbeingappliedtothosedollars.  So,  
thatpeopleherelocallyaregettingthosejobs. ThisisoneofoursolutionstocrimeintheCityof
SouthBend. Itmaynotbeasilverbulletbutitmayhelppeopleunemployedlookingforwork.   

EricHorvath (PublicWorks) - ThosefederalaidprojectsandalltheonesthatImentionedareall
throughtheDepartmentofTransportation. TheywillactuallybebidthroughtheDepartmentof
Transportation. Theplanandspecsaredeveloped, andthenbidswillbeacceptedandthestate
willruntheproject. Includedinthoseplansandspecswillberequirementsfordaysvacant, wage
rates, Idon’tknowofanylocalrequirements, therearebuyAmericanrequirements, thereare
otherrequirements.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - Myissuesarealwayscensustractdatathatappliestofederal
grantsorfederaldollars. Inthosecensustracts, guidelinesforpeoplewhoareunderthepoverty
rateorthehouseholdmedianincomeorwhatevertheguidelinesareandyou’regettingthose
peopletoworkonthosespecificprojects.  Therearetrainingdollarcomponentsalongwiththose
projects. IamlookingforthefullnessofthoseprojectstobeunveiledforthecitizensofSouth
Bend.   Notthatwearejustdoingitandwe’redonewithit.  The trainingcomponentisahellof
awaytostartgettingpeopleemployable. Theotherdollarsgotowardapercentageofthe
community, raceandsexbeingappliedtoaswelltomakesurepeoplearegettinganopportunity
towork. IsaidsomethingabouttheprojectatMartin’s.  ImeannoharmaboutthisIamlooking
atthenumbersfortheCityofSouthBend.  Atwhoisemployedandwhoemployedandwho’s
employedatwhatdollaramount.  Itbecomesmoreandmoreapparentthatpeopleofcolor
minorityclassificationhavenotbeenabletogetjobsthataremortgagepayingjobsandsustain
themaswell.  AsitrelatestoCitycontractandworkingfortheCityaswell. Hereisaprime
exampleandopportunitytomakesurethosethingsarebeingappliedforthebettermentofthe
City. Idon’tthinktherequestistoomuchtoaskfor, it’sbylaw, andIwouldlovetoseethem
happen.  Crimeisupbecausetherearealotofpeoplewhoarenotworking. Thedrugtradeis
highbecausepeoplefindmoreworkinsellingdrugsthenworkingforadollarthatismore
honest.   

AndpleaseSir, alongwiththetrainingdollars.  IthinkMurrayMillerhasbeenverygoodat
tryingtobringfolksintothetrade. Iamnotsureisthatisacooperativeprogrambetweenthe
Cityandlaborunion. ButIthinkthereisafairopportunityandafairchancetomakethatthing
happen.   

26

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

EricHorvath (PublicWorks) - Theremaybeothertrainingfederaldollarsthatwehaveaccessto
indifferentdepartments. Intermsoftheseinfrastructureprojectstherewillbeapercentgoalfor
MBE, WBEparticipationonallprojects. Therewillbearequirementthattheyhavetomeet,  
theymakeagoodfaithefforttoreachthatgoal.  Thatisprettyspecificallydefinedinthe
specifications.  Thosenumbersarebasedondisparitiesstudiesthatthestatedoes. Those
requirementswillbeinallthesefederalprojects.    

CouncilmemberHenryDavis- Iamhesaiddisparitiesstudy. Whenwestartedthebudgetprocess
IaskedhowtheCitygotintoaconversationaboutputtingtogetheradisparitystudy.  Apparently
thestatehasone. Ihaveaskedforthatdisparity, giventhenumbers, crime, unemploymentrate,  
homelessness, etc., howdowedothejobforcitizensifwedon’tknowwhereourbaselineisat?  
HasthatbeenapartofthediscussionwithintheranksoftheAdministration? Gettingadisparity
studyorpayingforone?   

JohnMurphy (Controller)- Ihaven’tbeenapartofthat, no.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavis- it’llbehooveustonottohavethatconversation.  Iamgoingto
continuetogobackatthatanddrivethatpointhome. Peoplemaybewantingtobelieveweare
gettingbetterbuttheproblemiswemayorcouldbegettingbetter, wedon’tknowexactlywhere
weareat. Sincewedoknowwhereweareat.  Howdoweknowwherewearegoing? Wehada
longdiscussionaboutanewdiversityofficer, thejobthepersonissupposedtobedoing. How
doesthatpersonknowwheretostepoffat? Iamgoingtoaskthatyourdepartmenttalkabout
fundingadisparitystudyfortheCityofSouthBend. Youwentintothemacroapproachofthe
budgetandIwanttogointosomemicrostuffrealquick. Thegangviolenceinventiongrouphow
muchdoesthatparticularprogramreceivefromthecity?   

JohnMurphy (Controller) - Idon’tthinkit’sverymuchfunding.  Ithinkit’smostlynon-City
fundsthatfundthat.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - Stillhowmucharetheyreceiving?  

JohnMurphy (Controller) - Idon’tknow. Iwillgetbacktoyouonthat.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - WhatIwanttodoismatchthatuptoaprogramthatwetalked
aboutlastweek.  Idon’tknowifyouwerearound.  MademenattheKingCenter. Theywere
usingthatasonetheirkeyperformanceindicatoroftheyear. Ijustwanttomatchthosetwo (2)  
thingsupreallyquick.  Iwanttotalkaboutpreventativeissueaswellashowdowereact. Ifwe
aregoingtohavethingsinplacethataregoingtostopthegrowthoftheviolenceandnefarious
activitieswithinourcommunitiesandneighborhoods.   

JohnMurphy- PhilSinclairupdatedtheCouncilontheMademenprogramlastweek.   

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- WewillnowmoveintothePublicHearingportion.   
Wewouldliketosaythattodaythismeetingisveryunusual.  Wehavesomanybudgetrelated
issueswehadtogetthrough. Normallywearenotherethislatebutsometimeweare.   

ThisbeingthetimeheretoforesetforthePublicHearingontheabovebill, proponentsand
opponentsweregivenanopportunitytobeheard.  

Infavor:  

JasonBanicki-Critchlow3822W. FordSt.-  Inaddressingoneoftheissuesthatwasraisedby
yougentlemenearliertonightparticularlyHenryandOliver.  Intermsofthediversityinclusion
officer.  Justtomakeyouguysawarein2012theNewHavenFireDepartmentlosta2.5million
dollarreservediscriminationlawsuittoahandfullofwhitefirefighterswhowerepassedover
forpromotionsbecauseof thewaytestresultswerehandled. Intermsofmakingsuretheywere
promotingtherightnumberofminorityofficers.  Sointermsofthingslikethatwedefinitely
havetokeepoureyesopen. Aswetalkaboutthecircuitbreakerexpiringin2020, Dr. Ferlic
makesaverygoodpointthatweneedtobekeepingoureyeonthebudgetgoingforwardand
howdoweprepareforthatwindfall. Wehavetostoplookingatone (1) yearbudgetplansand

27

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

th

wearegettingreadytotalkonthe12 abouttrashratesgoingup.  Insteadofwaitingfive (5)  
yearstosayweneedninepercent (9%) thisyear, howdowesayweneedtwopercent (2%)  
everyyear.  Weareinanerawhereweknowcitybudgetsaregettingtight. Wearehavingto
makeinfrastructureimprovementwewouldn’tnormallyhavetoifwereadytoten (10) years
ago. We’vekindofpuntedtheballalongtime. Weneedtobeplanningongoingforward. We
aregoingtohavetostartlookingtomakesometoughdecisionsgoingforwardinsomevery
criticalareas. Whentalkingaboutthediversityinclusionofficerintermsofpublicsafety. Police
officersmakeaverycompetitivefirstyearwageaswestarttopromotethemuptherankswe're
arenotascompetitiveascitiesoursize. Ifwewanttoattractqualityofficerswhetherwhiteor
HispanicorAfrican-Americanwehavetomakesurewetakecareofthosewhoputtheirliveson
thelineforus.  Ithastobereflectedinthepaystructure. Whereweareatintermsofthe2016
budgetyesabsolutely, wearetryingtohitkeydemographics, whichisbetterthanIcansayfive
5) orten (10) yearsagointhiscity. Thereareissueswe’regettingthatwouldn’thavefive (5) to
ten (10) yearsago. Iapplaudtheefforttoincludemorepeople. Keepaskingthetoughquestions
notonlywherearewegoingin2016butwherearewegoingin2017, 2018andkeepthateyeon
2020.  Wherewereallyknowwearegoingtohavesomefinancialdifficulties. Andmakingsure
wetakecareofthosewhotakecareofus.   

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- Isthereanyonewishingtospeakinopposition
seeingnoonethepublichearingisnowclosed.   

CouncilAttorneyadvisedtheappropriatemotionwouldbeindividualmotionsforeachofthebills:  
CouncilmemberOliverDavismadeamotionsendtheBill41-15tobecontinuedinthecouncil
portionandsetthethirdreadingforOctober12th. CouncilmemberGavinFerlicsecondedthe
motionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

CouncilmemberScottmadeamotionsendtheBill42-15tobecontinuedtotheCouncilportion
andsetthethirdreadingforOctober12th. CouncilmemberDr. Ferlicsecondedthemotionwhich
carriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.   

CouncilmemberScottmadeamotiontosendtheBill43-15tobecontinuedtotheCouncilportion
andsetthethirdreadingforOctober12. CouncilmemberOliverDavissecondedthemotionwhich
carriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

nd2 ReadingonBill51-15

PersonnelandFinanceCommitteeheldacommitteemeetingonthisbill.  Therewasnota
quorumsowesendthisbilltotheCouncilwithoutarecommendation.   

JohnMurphy (Controller) (Presenter) - Hadapolicytoamendourbudgetsfrequentlythroughout
theyear.  ThisyearwearedoingitinMarch, June, September, andDecember.  Thisappropriates
moneyincivilcityfundsandmanyofthemareverysmallandweliketocleanitupandmake
surewedon’twaituntiltheendoftheyear. Wediscussedtheseatcommitteeandlookforward
toyourfavorablerecommendation.   

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- AskedforquestionsfromtheCouncilforquestions
seeingnone.  

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- Isthereanyonewishingtospeakinfavoroforin
oppositionto, seeingnoonethepublichearingisnowclosed.   

CouncilmemberDr. FerlicmadeamotiontosendBill51-15totheCouncilwithafavorable
recommendation. CouncilmemberGavinFerlicsecondedthemotionwhichcarriedbyavoice
voteofseven (7) ayes.    

nd2 ReadingonBill52-15

PersonnelandFinanceCommitteeheldacommitteemeetingonthisbill.  Therewasnota
quorumsowesendthisbilltothecouncilwithoutarecommendation.   

28

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

JohnMurphy (Controller) (Presenter) - Theonlylargeoneonhereisadeductionof1.5million
dollars.  Offsetbyanincreaseof2.5milliondollarsforawastewatersecondaryimprovement
projectthatisbeingpaidforwithacombinationofbondfundswhicharealreadyappropriated
plusthispayasyougocapitalfund, we’vereviewedtherefundbalancesinthere.  Wefeelwe
candosomepayasyougocapitalwithouthavingtobondsothat’swhatweareproposingtodo
withthiscapitalproject.   

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- AskedforquestionsfromtheCouncilforquestions
seeingnone.  

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- Isthereanyonewishingtospeakinfavororin
oppositionseeingnoonethePublicHearingisnowclosed.   

CouncilmemberDr. FerlicmadeamotiontosendtheBill53-15totheCouncilwithafavorable
recommendation. CouncilmemberGavinFerlicsecondedthemotionwhichcarriedbyavoice
voteofseven (7) ayes.  

nd2 ReadingonBill53-15

CouncilmemberWhiteChairperson, PersonnelandFinanceCommittee, reportedthattheymet
thisafternoononthisbillandduetoalackofquorumthereisnorecommendation.  

JohnMurphy (Controller) (Presenter) - Thesearebudgettransfersfromonetypeofaccountto
another. It’sarequirementinIndianathattheCommonCouncilapprovethesetypesoftransfers.    
Forexampleyoumighttransferfromaservicesaccounttoasupplyaccount.  Thatwouldrequire
councilapproval. That’swhatthesearethereisnoadditionalappropriationsinthesebudget
transfers.     

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- AskedforquestionsfromtheCouncilforquestions
seeingnone.  

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- Isthereanyonewishingtospeakinfavorseeingno
one

Inopposition-    

JesseDavisPOBox10205SouthBend, IN- Ijustwanthimtoclarify.  Ihadfoundalineitem
budgetonherefora $158,000forsaltandwintermaterials.  Iwouldhavealreadythoughtthat
wasinthebudgetthatyouhadfiguredout.  Iwanttoknowisthatadditionalmoneytheyare
wantingforsaltforthiscomingwinter?   

EricHorvath- Thatisadditionalmoniestobuysaltthiswinter.  Sowehaveastockedshedofsalt
thiswinter.  Itusuallygoesoverbudgetcyclesandsometimeit’sdifficulttoguesshowmuchwe
aregoingtoneed. Wedothebestwecanonbudgeting.  Wetakeanaverageoftheprevious
years. Ifwehaveabadyear, itisusuallyduetosaltpricesandtheamountofsaltyouuse. Inthe
previousyearnotonlydidweusealotofsaltbutthesaltpricescontinuedtogoup. Werecently
rebidsalt.  We’vegotapricemuchmoreexpensivethanwhatwewerebuyingitforbutlessthan
thestateQPA.  It’saboutasgoodofapriceaswearegoingtoget.  Thisone-hundredandfifty- 
eightdollars ($158) willbetobuysaltforthiscomingwinter.    

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Doyoueveruseourlocalweatherforecastertohelpyou
anticipatewhattypeofwinterwearehaving?  Idovaluetheirexpertise. Doyouusethemto
forecastwhenitcomesdowntosnowandsalt?   

EricHorvath- Wehaven’tbecausethereissomuchvariabilityandthey’regoingtobepredicting
fromalargerpicture.  There’salotoffactorsthatwe’regoingtohaveinplay.  Oneisitcouldbe
antecedingconditions, itcouldbethetemperatureattheparticulartime, itcouldbehowmany
smalleventsdoweget, dowehavecontinuetoputproductdownfor, orisitjustonereallylarge
event.  Allthosethingsfactorintohowwespreadsalt. Wehaveasnowremovalpolicythatwe
followandit’sprettyprescriptivesoatcertaintemperaturesweapplycertainmaterialsandat

29

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

othertemperaturesweapplyothermaterials.  It’smoreinvolvedthanwhatwecouldgetfrom
them; Iwishwecouldgetsomethingfromthem. Thenwecouldgetpredictiveanalysis. Ihaven’t
seenanythingthatwouldbeabletodothat.   

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- thepublichearingisnowclosed.   

CouncilmemberDr. FerlicmadeamotionsendtheBill53-15totheCouncilwithafavorable
recommendation. CouncilmemberScottsecondedthemotionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteof
seven (7) ayes.  

SecondReadingonBill46-15

CouncilmemberWhiteChairperson, PersonnelandFinanceCommittee, reportedthattheymet
thisafternoononBill46-15andduetoalackofquorumthereisnorecommendation.  

JohnMurphyController (Presenter) - Thisordinancesetsupanewfundforthe311operation. It
isaninternalservicefund.  WeappreciatetheworkoftheCouncilAttorneywhoknowsthe
municipalcodebetterthanIdo. Wesetitupfornextyear.  It’sbudgetedwithaninternalfund
nextyear.  Itprovidesmoretransparencyanditisjustabetteraccountingfundbeingused. It
doesn’tchangeoperationalanything.   

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- AskedforquestionsfromtheCouncilseeingnone.  

CommitteeoftheWholeChairpersonWhite- Isthereanywishingtospeakinfavororin
oppositionseeingnoonethePublicHearingisnowclosed.   

CouncilmemberDr. FerlicmadeamotionsendtheBill53-15tothecouncilwithafavorable
recommendation. CouncilmemberOliverDavissecondedthemotionwhichcarriedbyavoice
voteofseven (7) ayes.  

RISEANDREPORT
CouncilmemberWhiterequestedamotiontoriseandreporttofullCouncil.  Somovedby
CouncilmemberOliverDavis. CouncilmemberGavinFerlicsecondedthemotionwhichcarried
byavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

ATTEST:       

ATTEST:  

JohnVoorde, CityClerk

KarenL. White, Chairperson
CommitteeoftheWhole

REGULARMEETINGRECONVENED
BeitrememberedthattheCommonCounciloftheCityofSouthBendreconvenedinthe
CouncilChambersonthefourthflooroftheCounty-CityBuildingat10:03p.m. Council
PresidentTimScott, presidedwithseven (7) memberspresent.  

BILLS - THIRDREADING

51-15

AppropriationBill

CouncilmemberWhitemadeamotionforthepassageofBill51-15. CouncilmemberOliver
DavissecondedthemotionwhichcarriedandtheResolutionwaspassedbyarollcallvoteof
seven (7) ayes. 

30

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

52-15

AppropriationBill

CouncilmemberGavinFerlicmadeamotionforthepassageofBill51-15. Councilmember
OliverDavissecondedthemotionwhichcarriedandtheResolutionwaspassedbyarollcall
voteofsix (6) ayesandone (1) nayCouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. 

53-15

AppropriationBill

CouncilmemberWhitemadeamotionforthepassageofBill51-15. CouncilmemberOliver
DavissecondedthemotionwhichcarriedandtheResolutionwaspassedbyarollcallvoteof
seven (7) ayes. 

46-15

Establishinganew311callcenter

CouncilmemberOliverDavismadeamotiontoamendanarticleofthemunicipalcodeasstated
inBill46-15. CouncilmemberWhitesecondedthemotionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven
7) ayes. 

CouncilmemberWhitemadeamotionforthepassageofBill46-15asamendedinthecommittee
inthewhole. CouncilmemberOliverDavissecondedthemotionwhichcarriedandthe
Resolutionwaspassedbyarollcallvoteofseven (7) ayes. 

RESOLUTIONS
CouncilPresidentTimScott- OnbehalfoftheclerksandlegalIwouldentertainamotionfora
five (5) minutebreak.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavismadeamotionforafive (5) minutebreak. CouncilmemberHenry
DavisJr. secondedthemotionwhichcarriedandthemotionwascarriedbyavoicevoteofseven
7) ayes.  

BeitrememberedthattheCommonCounciloftheCityofSouthBendreconvenedinthe
CouncilChambersonthefourthflooroftheCounty-CityBuildingat10:12p.m. Council
PresidentTimScott, presidedwithseven (7) memberspresent.  

15-85

AwrittenannexationTownshipMayflowerandWestern
Martin’s

CouncilmemberOliverDavisChairperson, ZoningandAnnexationCommittee, reportedthat
theymetthisafternoononthisresolutionandduetoalackofquorumthereisno
recommendation.  

th

MichaelDivita, PresenterCommunityInvestment: Officeson14 Floor- Thefiscalplan
addressesanearlynine (9) acrevoluntaryannexationareaattheSouthWestcornerof
MayflowerRd. Anewgrocerystoreisproposedfortheland.  Withthepossibleexceptionofa
newstreetlightnoothercapitalimprovementsareplannedbytheCity.  Sewerisavailableonthe
vacatedHuronSt. WaterisavailablealongWesternAve. Connectionwouldbedoneatthe
petitioner’sexpense. ThewesternhalfofMayflowerRdroadalongtheprojectsitewillbeadded
tothecity. Thepetitionerwillberesponsibleforcreatingatrafficimpactstudy. Theannexation
areawillbeservedbyPoliceBeat28, FireStation6onWesternAve, EmergencyMedic4, and

31

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

CodeEnforcementArea7. Thesewillbebeginoneyearaftertheeffectivedateoftheannexation
withresponsetimecomparabletootherresponsetimesintheCity. Iaskforyouradoptionofthis
resolution.   

CouncilPresidentScott- AskedforquestionsfromtheCouncilforquestionsseeingnone.  

MichaelDanchofDanch & (Petitioner) - Weareaskingfortheannexationsothatweare
allowedtomoveonwithourproject.   

CouncilPresidentScott- Isthereanyonewishingtospeakinfavor?  

JasonBanicki-Critchlow3822WFordSt.- Thiswillbeatwo (2) minutedrivefrommyhouse.   
Therearetwo (2) datedgrocerystoresinthearea. Iamveryexcitedforthedevelopmentofa
newone.  IthinkannexingpropertyandaddingsometaxbasetotheCityisagoodidea. Iknow
wearegettingthatnimbiattitudefromtheneighbors, unfortunatelydevelopmentalwayshasto
beinsomebody’sbackyard.  IthinkMartin’shasprovedtobeagoodneighborwhereverthey
wentintheCity. Thinkthiswouldanexcellentprojectmovingforward.   

InoppositionseeingnoonethePublicHearingisnowclosed.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavismadeamotiontoadoptResolution15-85. CouncilmemberWhite
secondedthemotionwhichcarriedandtheResolutionwasadoptedbyarollcallvoteofsix (6)  
ayesandone (1) nay, CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. 

15-86

ARESOLUTIONCONFIRMINGTHEADOPTIONOFADECLARATORY
RESOLUTIONDESIGNATINGCERTAINAREASWITHINTHECITY
OFSOUTHBEND, INDIANA, COMMONLYKNOWNAS511Delaine
Dr. , SOUTHBEND, INDIANA46628 ASARESIDENTIALLYAN
ECONOMOCREVITIALIZATIONAREAFORPURPOSESOFA (5)  
FIVE-YEARPERSONALPROPERTYTAXABATEMENTFORFED
GROUNDSYSTEM

Presenter: ChrisFielder, DepartmentofCommunityInvestment, Officesonthe14 floor –  
Beforeyouisaresidentialrealpropertytaxabatementrequest.  Thetotalnumberofjobstobe
createdis198jobs. Totalinvestmentintheprojectis $31,000,000.  Theestimatedtaxestobe
abatedoverthefive (5) yearperiodare $592,944.  Thetotaltaxestobepaidoverthefive (5)  
yearperiodare $693,000.  AaronisherefromFedExtodiscuss, ifyouhaveanyquestionshe
willanswerthem.  

th

Petitioner: Aaron, 5102S. DylanDr., SouthBend – ThisisabigopportunityforFedExwe’ve
outgrownourbuildrightnow.  Weareputtingthisbuildingforfutureexpansionwellbeyond
whatwearegoingtoneedrightnow.  OurplanwithFedExistodoubleourgroundnetwork.  
Thisisagreatopportunityforustobeanassettothecommunity.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr.- Outoftheone-hundredandninety-eight (198) jobsthatwillbe
createdhowmanyofthemarealreadyfilled?  

Petitioner- States, One-hundredandtwenty-seven (127) ofthem.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - Therewillbesixty (60) somenewjob.   

Petitioner- Immediatelyyesandthentherewillbesomegrowthinthenextfive (5) toten (10)  
years.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - Thenextfive (5) toten (10) yearsatwhatlevel?   

Petitioner- Totalwearelookingattwo-hundredandseventy (270).   

32

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - Idon’thaveaproblemwithusingthistaxabatementtoattract
companies.  MyproblemisnotwithyouSir. TheCityDepartmentinthenarrativeofbringingin
two-hundred (200) jobs, wheninfactyouareonlybringinginsixty (60) plusjobsthataregoing
tobeavailable.  Thereportreadstwo-hundred (200) jobs. That’sabitdifferentthansixty-eight
68) tosixty-nine (69) jobs. Iwanttofortherecordhaveabetterunderstandingofhowmany
jobstherearegoingtobeavailableoncethisiscomplete. Youhavemyfullsupport.   

Presenter- Thesearejobstheyprojectoutoverthelifeoftheabatement. It’snotasingularlook
it’salongtermlook.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - IamawareofthatandIhaveaproblemwiththewaywedo
abatementsaswellSir.  Idon’twanttohavethatconversationrightnow. Ithinktheabatement
processandhowwelookatthosenumbersareabitskewedoverthelifeoftheabatement. That’s
awholeotherconversation.  

ThisbeingthetimeheretoforesetforthePublicHearingontheabovebill, proponentsand
opponentsweregivenanopportunitytobeheard.  

CouncilmemberDr. FredFerlicreturned)  

TherebeingnoonepresentwishingtospeaktotheCouncileitherinfavoroforinoppositionto
thisbill, CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic madeamotiontoadoptResolution15-70. Councilmember
OliverDavissecondedthemotionwhichcarriedandtheResolutionwasadoptedbyarollcallvote
ofseven (7) ayes. 

15-87

ARESOLUTIONCONFIRMINGTHEADOPTIONOFADECLARATORY
RESOLUTIONDESIGNATINGCERTAINAREASWITHINTHECITY
OFSOUTHBEND, INDIANA, COMMONLYKNOWNAS802S.  
VICENTST, SOUTHBEND, IN46617ASARESIDENTIALLY
DISTRESSEDAREAFORPURPOSESOFAFIVE (5) YEARREAL
PROPERTYTAXABATEMENTFORJAMESANDSUSANFAIRINGTON.   

Presenter: BrockZeeb, DepartmentofCommunityInvestment, Officesonthe14 floor –They
proposetobuilda $525,000newhousewithtotaltaxestobecreatedoverthefive (5) yearperiod
of $27,798.  Estimatedtaxestobeabatedoverthefive (5) yearperiodwillbe $18,093.  Total
taxestobepaidoverthefive (5) yearperiodis $25,905. Thepetitionerisheretospeakonthe
projectifyouhaveanyquestions.   

th

Petitioner: DavidSerazskiCenturyBuilders1115BurnsAve. – Irepresentthepetitionerwho
builtanewsinglefamilyhomewearegoingtoteardownavacanthouseandbuildabrandnew
one.  Inanareawehavebeenredevelopingoverthelastfive (5) years. Thisisataxabatement
wehaveaskedforinthepastandhavebeengrantedonotherproperties.     

CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic – Howmuchisthedemolition?   

Presenter- Itisfive-hundredandtwenty-fivedollars ($525.00)   

CouncilmemberDr. Ferlic- Good.    

ThisbeingthetimeheretoforesetforthePublicHearingontheabovebill, proponentsand
opponentsweregivenanopportunitytobeheard.  

TherebeingnoonepresentwishingtospeaktotheCouncileitherinfavoroforinoppositionto
thisbill, CouncilmemberOliverDavismadeamotiontoadoptResolution15-87. Councilmember
KarenWhitesecondedthemotionwhichcarriedandtheResolutionwasadoptedbyarollcallvote
ofseven (7) ayes. 

15-88

ARESOLUTIONRESCENDINGRESOLUTION43-52-1443-61-14
DESIGNATINGCERTAINAREASWITHINTHECITYOFSOUTH
BEND, INDIANA, COMMONLYKNOWNAS211WWASHINGTONST.  

33

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

SOUTHBENDIN46601ASANECONOMICREVITALIZATIONAREA
FORPURPOSESOFAFOUR (4) YEARREALPROPERTYTAX
ABATEMENT

CouncilmemberGavinFerlic, Chairperson, CommunityInvestmentCommitteemetthis
afternoonanddidnothaveaquorumandtheresolutionwassentwithnorecommendation.   

Presenter: ChrisFielding, DepartmentofCommunityInvestment, Officesonthe14 floor – The
currentownerofthebuildingisproposingamuchmoreextensiveproject.  Asredevelopmentas
opposedtoarepairofthestructureofthebuilding.  Thereforewearerequestingarecessionof
theinitialtaxabatement43-52-14, 43-61-14inhopestheywillbereplacedwithamoreextensive
taxabatementwhichareinthenextthreeresolutions.   

th

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Justforclarificationwhatisthedifferenceindollarvalue.   

Presenter: Theinitialtaxabatementwasapproximately5.8milliondollarstorepairtheelevators,  
chiller, heating, andairconditioningsystem, parkinggarageandwindows.  Thenextwillbea30
milliondollarrenovationtotheentirebuilding.   

ThisbeingthetimeheretoforesetforthePublicHearingontheabovebill, proponentsand
opponentsweregivenanopportunitytobeheard.  

LeanneBillousaCenturyCenter120S. St. JosephSt. -   Iknowya’llhaveourletterofsupport
forthisbutIjustwantedtosayitvocallythatwecouldnotbemoreexcitedatCenturyCenter
aboutthis.  Thereisgreatpotentialforconventionbusinessaswellastheoveralleconomic
impactit’sgoingtohaveontheentirecommunity.   

SamuelBrownCUBG222ENavarreSt. – Ifeelverypositiveaboutthis. Thenanotherpartof
mekindofworriesaboutit.  ArewegoingtodolikewedidwiththeHallofFame?  Ihopethis
goesthroughandreallydoeswhatitisintendedtodofortheCityofSouthBend.  Itisoneofthe
mostvaluablepiecesofrealestatewehaveinSouthBend. InthebackofmymindIkeep
thinkingaboutthathalloffamebutIhopeitgoesthrough.   

RobertBartels (Martin’s), 760CotterSt. – Toseetheenormityofthisprojecttakeoff.  Ijust
referyoutoyourownscreensaver.  Itwouldbenicetoseesomelightsoninthatbuilding.  To
seethemomentumandeconomicdevelopmentthatthisrepresentsthisisfantastic.    

CouncilPresidentScott- Inoppositiontothisbill, seeingnone.    

CouncilmemberOliverDavismadeamotiontoadoptResolution15-88. CouncilmemberGavin
FerlicsecondedthemotionwhichcarriedandtheResolutionwasadoptedbyarollcallvoteof
seven (7) ayes.  

CouncilmemberWhitemadeamotionforthepurposeofPublicHearingtohearResolution15-89,  
15-90, 15-91. CouncilmemberDr. Ferlicsecondedthemotionwhichcarriedandthemotionwas
adoptedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

15-89

ARESOLUTIONOFTHECOMMONCOUNCILOFTHECITYOF
SOUTHBENDDESIGNATINGACERTAINAREAWITHINTHECITY
OFSOUTHBEND, INDIANA, COMMONLYKNOWNAS211W
WASHINGTONST. SOUTHBENDIN46601ASANECONOMIC
REVITALIZATIONAREAFORPURPOSESOFATEN (10) YEAR
REALPROPERTYTAXABATEMENTFORAHOTELLOCATEDATTHE
TOWERATWASHINGTONSQUARE

15-90

ARESOLUTIONOFTHECOMMONCOUNCILOFTHECITYOF
SOUTHBENDDESIGNATINGACERTAINAREAWITHINTHECITY
OFSOUTHBEND, INDIANA, COMMONLYKNOWNAS211W

34

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

15-91

WASHINGTONST. SOUTHBENDIN46601ASANECONOMIC
REVITALIZATIONAREAFORPURPOSESOFATEN (10) YEAR
REALPROPERTYTAXABATEMENTFORARETAILPROPERTY
LOCATEDATTHETOWERATWASHINGTONSQUARE

ARESOLUTIONOFTHECOMMONCOUNCILOFTHECITYOF
SOUTHBENDDESIGNATINGACERTAINAREAWITHINTHECITY
OFSOUTHBEND, INDIANA, COMMONLYKNOWNAS211W
WASHINGTONST. SOUTHBENDIN46601ASANECONOMIC
REVITALIZATIONAREAFORPURPOSESOFATEN (10) YEAR
REALPROPERTYTAXABATEMENTFORAPARKINGGARAGE
LOCATEDATTHETOWERATWASHINGTONSQUARE

CouncilmemberGavinFerlic, Chairperson, CommunityInvestmentCommitteemetthis
afternoonand didnothaveaquorum andtheResolutions15-89, 15-90, 15-91weresentwithno
recommendation.   

th

Presenter: ChrisFielding, DepartmentofCommunityInvestment, Officesonthe14 floor –  
Beforeyourepresentthree (3) offour (4) potentialtaxabatementsnegotiatedontheproject.  The
buildingisgoingtobesubdividedintofourmarketablesections: theresident, thehotel, the
parkinggarage, andthecommercialspace.  Thesubplotprocesshasalreadybegun.  Thecurbtax
canneverbeappliedtothehotelsectionofthebuildingbetweennowandtheconfirming
resolutionwhichmaybesixty (60) toseventy (70) days. Theywillfinishthereplotoftheentire
structureinthenextseven (7) days.  Atthepointpriortotheconfirmingresolutionwemadesure
wehavetaxcodenumbersforallfourparcels.  Wewillbecomingtothenextmeeting, wehave
aUUCResolutiontocreateresidentialpropertyinthedowntownarea. Thatmeetinghasbeen
scheduled. Wedonotanticipateanyproblems.  Thetotalprojectwillcreateeighty-two (82) new
jobs, sixty-three (63) inthehotel, twenty (20) intheretailspace, andone (1) asparkgarage
attendantwithanannualpayrollof2.7milliondollars.  Wedohavemultipleexceptionstothe
localcode.  Onthehoteltaxkeywearerequestingten (10) yearvacantbuildingtaxabatement
withamodifiedschedule. Understatecode6-1.1-12.1modifiedinJuly2015toallowthe
Counciluptoten (10) yearsatanyscheduleagreeduponatthelocallevel. Thatscheduleisa
100% forthefirsttwo (2) yearswhiletheyareinconstructionandrampupninetypercent (90%)  
forthe3 year, theneighty-five (85%) forthenextthree (3) years, andsixtypercent (60%) for
thelastthree (3) years.  Thatwillbethesamescheduleappliedtothestandardabatementsthat
willnotexceedten (10) yearseither, forresidential, commercial, andparkinggarage.   Weare
alsoproposingintheMOA36monthsinsteadofthestandard24monthswetypicallyallowfora
projecttobecompletedduetothescopeoftheproject.  Weexpectareturnonthiswithinthe
next60days. Atthattimewewillhaveformaltaxduenumbers.  Theproposedinvestmentinthe
propertyisapproximately $33.3milliondollars, totalpublicinvestmentwiththeabatements
whichwillhaveadirectcorrelationtotheamountofmoneytheyputintothebuilding. The
petitionerisherefromtheKramerGrouptoansweranyquestionsaboutthenewconstruction
thatyoumayhave.   

rd

Petitioner:  RobertKramer, KramerDesignGroup1420BroadwayDetroit, MI– Iamhere
representingtheownershiponthisproperty. KramerDesignGroupisafirmofarchitectsand
naturedesignersplanners.  Thebulkofourworkisadaptivereuse.  Werecentlycompleteda
projectofsimilarscopeindowntownDetroitinalofthotelwithluxuryhousesabovewithmixed
useretailonthegroundfloor.  Itdidnothaveaparkingcomponent.  Itopenedapproximatelya
yearagotodatewithgreatsuccess.  Apartments100% leasedandthehotelshavebeendoing
wellsincedayone (1).  Itistypicalforourfirmtobeinvolvedinthesemixed-useprojects.  We
doalotofhotelworknationallyaswellasresidential.  Wewerefirstawardedthisprojectwhen
itwasjustthehotelcomponentaboutsix (6) monthsago.  Weobservedtheparkinggaragedeck
wasinseveredisrepair:  twostructuralissueswherethesaltsateawayattheconcreteand
supportingsteel.  Abigchangeindirectionthere, veryquicklywediscoveredthemajorityofthe
facilityhadreacheditsusefullife.  Subsequentlyourfirmhasbeeninvolvedincomprehensive
planningexercisesfortheentirefacility.  Thisisadaylightviewofkeyinterestwhenwewere
studyingthepropertyandtryingtounderstandwheretoputinentrancestothefacilitywe
becameawarethroughtheexcellentworkoftheCityofthestreetscapesprogram, thetwo-way

35

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

streetprogram, anditreallytiesintowhatourexperiencehasshownthatthesetwo-waystreetsin
anurbanprojectreallyenliventhedowntownofurbanarea.   

Theplanningexerciseandthisclientwasveryinterestedinsortofenliveningstreets.  Weare
takingawaytheolddrive-thrusoonthefarlefthandissomeexpandedretail.  Thecenterwith
thecanopyisactuallytheresidentialentrance. It’sadedicatedlobby.  Inthetwocornersisa
signatureretailorsignaturerestaurant.  Theclientisenvisioningalargersortofdestination
restaurant.  Manyofyourememberthatthefacilityusedtohavearestaurantinitinthelower
level. Wearepreservingthatentirelowerlevelforthistypeofrestaurantuse.  Therearegreat
assetsthereisabankvaletdownthere, youcanimaginegreatprivatediningarea.  Onthefar
righthandsideistheentrancetothehotel.  ALoftasabrandbecauseitispartoftheStarwood
familyofbrands, theALoftisthemidlevelofafullservice “W” Westin.  Ittargetsawider
rangeofclientele, fromayoungupandcomingprofessionaltosortofpeoplewhogobytheir
ownbeat.    

Onthefarrightsideyouwillseeitdropoffandthesignatureswoop.  Weareremovingthebulk
orsortoftheweightofthebuilding.  Thoselargeconcreteblockpanelsthataresomewhat
deadeningtotheeyesight.  Makingitalittlemorealivewithcolorandtexture, openingupthe
garage.   Intheupperleftcorneryouwillseethebrandnewwindows.  Thoseareactuallythe
expandedballroomsthatarecurrentlyonthatfloor. Totakeadvantageofviewsthatcurrently
havenoviewstooverlookthecity.  Thisnextviewisofanoverallviewoftheproperty, the
renovationistoptobottomandwehavetoreplacethewindows.    

Togiveyouasenseofwhytherewasalongerduration, it’ssimplythephysicaltimeittakesto
renovatethespace. Thegoalisstilltobecompletedin2017it’sjusttryingtoprotectfrom
unknowns.  Aswearedivingintothisbuildingmoreandmorethingshavebeendiscoveredas
problems.  Atthispoint, wehaverecommendedandtheclienthastakentheadviceandbegan
someearlyphasesofconstruction.  Noconstructionhasbegunbuttheplanistobegindemolition
abatementveryshortly.  Apermithasbeengrantedandalsowearedoingawindowreplacement.  
Togiveyouasenseofthevaluethewindowreplacementisa2.4milliondollarprojectinitself.   
Thedemolitionabatementinitselfis1.4millionandthatisjustsimplyremovingthestuffthat’s
inthere.  Ourfirmiscompletingthecompleteconstructiondocument.  Thereisaseparatelocal
firmwhoisinvolvedasstructuralengineers, structuralrehabilitationoftheparkingstructureand
willbeworkingwithusontherestofthefacility.  Currentlytheprojectisplannedwitheighty- 
six (86) residentialunitsthetopthirdoftheproperty.  Thebalanceofthetowerisone-hundred
andeighty-three (183) hotelrooms, effectivelywhatwasthereatonepoint.  Thetopfloorofthe
parkingdeckareaisactuallyballrooms, apool, andsuch.  Thetopoftheparkingdeck, theroof
levelisgoingtobeagreatcommunityspacefortheresidentsincludingadogwalkingarea.  The
nexttwoviewsaresortofeveningviews.  Itisreallyimportanttoustodesignboththedaytime
andtheevening.   Thekeytorevitalizationofadowntownismakingitfeelsafe, beingsafe,  
makingitfeelsignatureandupbeat.  Wetookalotofefforttotryandnotcreatesomethingthat
wasobtuse.  Certainlythisbuildingbyitselfismuchtallerthananythingaroundbutwewanted
tohighlightitsfeaturesthroughcleverlightingandbringsomeexcitement. Thefinalviewisa
streetlevelviewatnight.  Youcanseethelightandspacethatmakeitunique.  Everysinglewall
ofdrywallinthetowerisbeingmoveddowntoitscorestructure.  Fromanenergyefficiency
perspectivewearereplacingeverysinglelightfixture, thephonesystemsarebeingreplaced.   
Themechanicsystemisa100% replacement.  Weareprettyexcitedaboutthewholething.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Italkedtoyouabouttheissues, aboutcompletingthehoteland
apartmentsatthesametimecouldyoushareaboutthat?  Talkaboutthesynergybetweenyour
hotelandthedoubletree.  Isthereanythingyouaredoingtomaketheplacemoreenergy
efficient?   

Petitioner- TheALoftiswhatyoucallamidservicehotel.  TheDoubletreebydefinitionisafull
servicehotel.  Themostsignificantdifferenceistherestaurantsandballroomspace.  Wehave
verylimitedballroomspaceprobablyseatsone-hundredandfifty (150) versustrueconference
centerspace.  Fromacompetitivestandpointitsclosestcompetitorarethetwonewbuildingsthat
youseewhenyoucomeoffthehighway.   Thatiswhatweconsiderthenormalmarket. Froma
hotelperspectiveoftentimesthedemographicyoulookatismajorbrandstheHiltonbrandorthe
Starwoodbrand.  Eachhavetheirfrequentflyerreturnguestprogram.  Thosedrivealotofthe

36

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

businesstraffic. Theyactuallydon’tcompeteagainsteachother.  Whatwefoundistalkingwith
theconventioncentertheywantedthistypeofpropertyintheirset.  Itismid-pricedinrelative
terms.  Wedon’tactuallybelievethatitwilltakeawaybutactuallysupporteachother.  What
typicallyhappensisifthedoubletreeisfullthattypeofpropertywillsendguesttothisandvice
versa.   

ToquestionaboutLEEDorenvironmentfriendlinessthepropertyisnotseekingLEED
certification.  LEEDcertificationforaremodelisachallengingthingaslogicalasyoumight
thinkthatitis.  Fromanenergyperspectivewearedoingtremendousthings.  Thelightingwill
beLED.  It’sgoingtobeanopenairgarage, naturalventilationversusthefans.  Thelightingis
justsuperiorinthatsense.  Theheatingandcoolingsystemforthewholebuildingwillbea
closedloopheatpumpsystem.  It’sessentiallythemostefficientthatwehaveotherthanifwe
hadoutsourcedthermal.  ALoftasacompanyandtheproductstheyrequireareallofagreen
nature.  Theresidentialfromourfirmperspectivewillbeinasimilarstate.  Inourtermsitwould
certainlyqualityforLEEDcertificationorhigher, atleastsilverbydefault.  Theplanofattackat
thispointisthatthegaragewouldbetheimmediatestartbecausewehavesomestructuralissues,  
aswellasreleasingthewindowssowecandothewindows.    

Thewindowsaregoingtotakethebetterpartofayeartoreplace.  Theleadtimeonglassinthe
nationalmarketisalongtime.  Theelevatorcontractwouldbeletaswell. Theelevatorleadtime
isabout16weeks, thatonapprovalofshopdrawingsoyouaddanother4monthsontothat.  The
goalishaveallthoseinplacesothatwhenwearedoingtheheavyconstructionthereisaplace
forworkerstopark, thereisawaytogoupanddownthebuildingandit’swatertight. Theintent
isthattheentiretowerisbeingworkedonsimultaneously.  Everysimilarsystemandsuch. It
wouldcomeonlineallatonce. Weknowthedeveloperwouldliketohavethehotelfirstifthey
hadtochooseoneortheother.  Theydon’tcompeteagainsteachother.  Thereareseparate
lobbies, entrancessoitworksoutreallywell. Thelastthingtobefilledupistheretailonthe
groundfloor.  Alotofpeoplewillwanttoseetheprojectfirstbeforetheywouldundertakebeing
inthebuilding. It’sallplannedsooneprojectcanbedonewithoutinterferingwiththeother.   
Thereareseparateelevatorsandtheworks.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Inthecellarsincetheyhaveakitchendowntherewillitbe
availableforrentforfoodtrucks?   

Petitioner: Oneofthebenefitsofthebuildingwasithadtwocommercialgradekitchensoneon
thetopandoneonthebottomandwesaidlet’snotdoanythingtodemolishthem. It’sactuallya
fullservicecateringkitchen.  Weareprotectingitforfuturedevelopmentwhateverthatmight
be.  Wecertainlydon’tknow. IamapersonalfanoffoodtrucksandinDetroitweknowtheyare
apartofthelivingculture.   

MarkNeal, BradleyCompany- Theownerisinterestedinkeepingalloptionsopenincluding
foodandrestaurants.  Hedoesnoticethattherearetremendousopportunitiesbecauseofallthe
infrastructure.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. – ThankyoufortheinvestmentIamlookingforwardtoseeing
it.  Itlookslikeabeautifulbuilding.  Thishasbeenalongtimecoming.  Myquestionsarefor
Mr. Gilling. Iaminterestedinfindingoutthedemographicreportonthisparticularprojectasit
relatestoalltheotherprojectsinthedowntownarea. Iaminterestedinseeinghowtheseprojects
willbringpeopledowntown.  Wherearetheycomingfromaretheyworkingorretiredfolk?  
Whoarewemarketingthesenewlivablespacesto?  Therehastobeatrendmeandmy
colleaguesarenotawareof.  ThereissomethingthatwearepushingatandIdon’tknowwhat
thetimelineofthatfullplanis.  Canyouprovideuswiththatreportthatsayswhatthatis?   
DowntownSouthBend2020alltheapartmentsarefilledmostpeopleareworkinginRedSox
district.   

ChrisFieldingPresenter, Officesonthe14 FL- WehavetheZimmerman- BoltStudyIcan
sendouttoeverybody.  Anecdotallyyoukeepseeingusbringresidential, thisisactuallya
diversityhub, ifyoulookattheHoffmanHotelbuildingwedidataxabatementforthatis
actuallytheartistlevelpopulation, it’salow-incomehousingprojectbutit’sdedicated
specificallytoartists.  TheJMSandtheLaSallewewillbetheclosesttothepeoplewhoare

th

37

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

attractedtodowntownnowyouwilllikelyseegraduatestudentsandpeoplewhowork
downtown.  ThisprojecthereismoreoftheA+ theemptynesterwhoreallywantstoliveinan
urbansetting.  Hassecondhomesomewhereelse.  Thisthehigherendofthefourprojectswe’ve
seen. Wearehopingtheycreatefourdifferenthousingsituationssotheyarenotjustcompeting
forthesamepopulation.  AsNotreDamedemolishestheirgraduatestudenthousingwithnoplan
toreplaceityouwillstartseeanewpopulationandmorematurepopulationgravitatingtowards
thedowntown.  Manywillhaveinternshipopportunitiesignitionparkandtheseopportunities
willbein-betweentheirworklifeandtheirschoollife.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - Therearesomeprojectionsthataretherethatwearenotbeing
connectedwith.  IthinkwhatIwassayingearlierthisisapiece, ifIrememberaboutthisfrom
four (4) monthsagomaybeIcanconnectthem. Wehavetheabilitytoconnectallthedotssowe
knowwherewearegoing. Yeah, wearevotingonthisprojectitlooksnicebutmyfirstquestion
iswherearetheycomingfromandwherearetheygoingtobeworking. Howdopeoplefrom
SouthBendwhohaveamedianhousehouseholdincomeof $36,000, withfiftypercent (50%)  
povertyrate, whorentsthatfromSouthBend? HowdoIfigurethisout?   Thatreportwillbe
veryvaluabletohaveandalsotoreadbecausewearekindoflikefeelingourwaythroughthis.  
Somehowsomewayyouguysareabletobringtheseprojects.  

ChrisFieldingPresenter, Officesonthe14 Fl. - Iwillsendthelinkouttoeverybody. Wealso
didputitinthebudget.   

th

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr. - ThankyouIthinkthatwasthequestion. Wejustgotthat
informationtoday. TheotherquestionIhaveSirisIamlookingatthistaxabatementrighthere,  
15-91.  Onthisoneitsaysprovidetraining, thishaseverythingtodowiththeconstruction, it
saysyestwenty-eight (28) points, thenonnumberthree (#3) itsaysworkforcerelatedletterC,  
maintainanaffirmativeactionplanyes, thirty-five (35) forthirty-five (35) points.  ThenIgot
overtopartwhereitsayspleaselistthenumberoffull-timeandpart-timefemale, minorityfor
eachofthelastthree (3) yearsandthatareaisblank.  Myquestionishowdowemakesurethat
thefolksthatareherethatneedthepositionsandjobsandjobtrainingareactuallygettingthat
attention.  ThisisalongprojecthowdowemakesurethatmoneyisstayinginSouthBend?  On
thedemolitionprojectsthemoneywasleavingoutofherebothways.  Howcanwebeginto
maintainthejobssothemoneystayshere?   

th

ChrisFieldingPresenter, Officesonthe14 Fl. - InthissituationIthinkwe’vebeenvery
proactive.  Theeasiestonewordanswertothatisit’sgoingtorequirepartnership. It’sgoingto
requirepartnershipandit’sgoingtorequireallofyoutobeapartofthatpartnership. You
approvedfundingforthemanufacturestrainingprogramlastyear.  Knowingthattheseprojects
werecomingonlineandotherprojectsthatwewillprobablybebringingforwardtoyouinthe
nextthree (3) tofive (5) weeks.  We’veactuallymodifiedthatthroughtheDepartmentofPublic
Works.  Whatweareseeingisalotofindividualsthatwewererecruitingwereinterestedin
goingintomanufacturing.  NowwedohospitalitytrainingatIUSBandmedicaltrainingthrough
IVYTechandmanufacturingprogramthroughPurdue.  Thetrainingprogramsarealreadyset
up. Ifwewanttheindividualsinthiscommunitythatareinmostneedofthesejobstogotothe
courtyardhotelorALoftortheIrelandRosesuitesthatarebeingbuiltweneedhelprecruiting.   
FromJamesSummer, DiversityGroup, NAACP, WorkforceDevelopmentwearenotabletofill
classes. Wearehearingthatthereareawholelotofpeoplewhowantthejobandwantthejob
trainingbutwhenweputthejobtrainingoutthereourpartnersarenotsteppinguptohelpusfill
theclasses.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavisJr.- Ihaveaskedthatweputallthejobsthatarecomingona
website, IhaveaskedtohavethosetypesofconversationsnotonlyonCouncilfloorsbutin
committeehearingswedon’thavethem, whoiscommunicatingthisinformationasfaras
workforcedevelopment, andhowaretheycommunicatingit?  Wearechoosingnewpeopletodo
ajobthatneedsamoreexperiencedoutlookonthings.  I’mgoingtochallengeyouasyou
challengethatweincorporatetheseconversationswiththefuturedevelopmentofjobshere.  If
theyareherethenweneedtofillthem, iftheyareherethenpeopleneedtoknowaboutthem.  
Peoplearenotsigningforitbecausetheydon’tknowanythingaboutthem.    

38

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

ThisbeingthetimeheretoforesetforthePublicHearingontheabovebill, proponentsand
opponentsweregivenanopportunitytobeheard.  

TherebeingnoonepresentwishingtospeaktotheCouncileitherinfavorof:  

JasonBanicki-Critchlow3822WFordSt- Thisisobviouslyapieceofpropertywe’vealltalked
aboutmorethanafewtimesatCouncilmeetings.  Anytimeyourprimerealestateyou’remost
visiblepiecesitsvacantandemptyitsaysalotabouttheCity.  Itsaysevenmorewhenwecan
quicklyturnitaroundandturnitintoaverylargeproject.  Itwilladdtotheexcitement
downtownandaddtofunctionality. WegotimprovementsattheCenturyCenterandwehave
otherhotelsrunning.  Weknowwhatweneedtodoisgetsomeofthebiggerconventionsthat
helpbringdollarstorestaurants, stores, gasstationsthatisexcitingtosee.  Fromanarchitectural
standpointIthinkitisabeautifulbuilding. Ithinkithastheopportunitytochangethetoneof
SouthBend. We’vebeena1940-50sstyletown, brickanddrabandconcrete. Ithinkthisis
somethingweallneedtobeinfavorof.   

ChristopherBarth, 236TattySt. - Giventhe30milliondollarinvestmentintotheproperty.  Iwant
toexpressmysupportforthesethree (3) taxabatements.  Theprojectreflectsasignificantneed
forinvestmenttoaniconicpropertyinourcommunity.  Therenovationisgoingto assistin
attractingconventionstoourarea. IthinkIheardthatwecouldhaveputontwo-hundredandfifty
250) RFPsifwehadandthisparticularhotel, alongwiththedoubletree, andtheproposedother
hoteldowntown.  Officeratesaregoingtoprobablygoupdowntownwithnomoreoffices
availableinthisbuilding, rateswillgoupinotherhighClassApropertiesintownwhichisalso
goodfortheeconomy.  Iurgeyouguystosupportthis.  

Inoppositiontothisbill: seeingnone.   

CouncilmemberWhitemadeamotiontoadoptResolution15-89. CouncilmemberOliverDavis
secondedthemotionwhichcarriedandtheResolutionwasadoptedbyarollcallvoteofseven (7)  
ayes.  

CouncilmemberOliverDavismadeamotiontoadoptResolution15-90. CouncilmemberWhite
secondedthemotionwhichcarriedandtheResolutionwasadoptedbyarollcallvoteofseven (7)  
ayes.  

CouncilmemberWhitemadeamotiontoadoptResolution15-91. CouncilmemberOliverDavis
secondedthemotionwhichcarriedandtheResolutionwasadoptedbyarollcallvoteofseven (7)  
ayes.  

15-92

ARESOLUTIONapprovingthepurchaseofrealestate
propertylocatedat2401W. WesternAve

CouncilmemberGavinFerlicChairperson, CommunityInvestmentCommittee, reportedthat
theymetthisafternoononthisresolutionandduetoalackofquorumthereisno
recommendation.  

th

Presenter: JitinKain, DepartmentofCommunityInvestment, Officesonthe14 floor – This
resolutionisseekingtopurchasethispropertyonWesternAve. andOliveStreetwiththe
intentionofincreasingthesafetyattheintersection.  Asyouareawarethisisanintersectionthat
hassomeissueswithturningradii. ThePolishNationalBuildingAssociationisconsistentlyhit
withlargetrucksmovingwest.  AnumberofthelandusesonOlivehaveahighusageoftrucks
andsotheintersectiondoesitsfairshare. Wehavelookedatimprovingtheintersectioninthe
past.  In2009, aboutfive (5) feetofright-of-waywaspurchasedfromthePNAbuildingtryingto
expandtheintersectionwhichhadsomelimitedsuccessbuthasstillnotchangedthetruck
movementsasyoucanseefromtheimageandrecentdamagetobuildingsfromlargetrucks.  We
alsolookedatchangingtheleftturnbarssothereismoreroomforthetrucksandstillhad
limitedsuccess.  TheanalysisfromourEngineeringDepartmentsaystheturningradiusshould

39

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

bechangedfromatwenty (20) footradiustoaseventy (70) footradius. InthiscasethePNA
folksapproachedtheCitywithadesiretocloseoperationsatthatfacility.  Theyintendto
continuethoseactivitiesbyusingrentalspaceandothercommunitycenters. Wehavedecidedto
pursuetheacquisitiontosecureasaferintersection. Withtheintentionofputtingthelandback
onthemarketimmediately, forlightindustrialuse, perIndianaCode36-1-10.5. Theacquisition
mustbedonebyconductinganappraisal, theaverageoftwo (2) appraisalsdonebytwo (2)  
certifiedappraiserswhichiswhatthedepartmentinitiated. Theaverageofthetwo (2) and
appraisalpriceis $200,000whichwouldbetheofferpriceforthebuilding. Thescheduleif
approvedtodayistocloseOctober9 thenschedulethedemolitionofthebuildingsoworkcan
happenlaterthisfallorwinter. Thishelpsusgetreadytoimprovethepropertynextyear. Ihave
acoupleimagesjustshowingwhattheinitialconceptis:  thisisshowingthelargeturningradius
fortheWB65trucks.  Thebuildingdoesn’thaveareusepotentialthereforeademolitionthen
puttingitbackonthemarketforadifferentuse.  Thelastcoupleofslidesshowthecurrentview
ofthebuilding. Iwouldbehappytoanswerquestions.   

th

CouncilmemberOliverDavis– AgainIbringupthesignageissueandhowthisroadjust
suddenlymergesandthesameatWalnut.  Canwedosomethingaboutthis?  Wehavetraffic
signageintheairthatisdirectingus.  One (1) partturnsifyoudon’tgetoverquickly. Especially
inthewintertimeorthefoggypartofthemorning, thatbecomesamajorproblem. Ifwecould
seethemintheyellowandblack. Orsignsinfrontofusthatcoulddirectusthatthisisthe
turningitwouldjustclearupalotofthings.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavis- Jitinwegotsomeseriousissuesoverthere. Idon’tknowifthisis
goingtosatisfythoseissues. IwasatWellsFargotryingtogetoutandIcouldn’t. Ifweoffer
anotherlaneoverthereIcanonlybelievethatthereisgoingtobemoretraffic. Iwastryingto
getouttogowest.  IwastryingtogetouttoturnrightonWesternandthatwaslikeplaying
Frogger. IturnedmycararoundtogobackthroughtheparkinglottoturnrightontoWestern
andIhadthesameissueluckilysomebodyhadaheartandallowedmetogetin.  WhenIgetout
therethetrafficisbackedcleardownthestreettoMaryCrestbuilding. It’sbeensaidthemost
dangerousintersectioninthecityofSouthBendisatWalnutandWestern.  Ifyougothere
betweenthehoursof3o’clockand5o’clockyouwillencounteratrafficjamgoingbothways
fromWalnuttoOlive.  Thenyouhaveone (1) laneineachdirectiononOlive. Wehaveahuge
trafficissueoverthere. Idon’tknowifthatwasonpurposetojamuptrafficoriftherewas
thoughtthatit’llworkitselfout. Youcan’tgetout. Youcan’tgetoutofthebank, thegasstation,  
iftherewasabowlingalleyyoucan’tgetoutthebowlingalleyyoucan’tgetout.  Soifyoudrive
inyoucancancelChristmasforthenextthirty (30) toforty (40) minuteswhenyou’retryingto
getout.  NodifferentthanLincolnwaywhenIwastalkingabouttheKremoBakerysituation.   
Thatwasthetruth.  Hedidn’twanttoownuptoitit’sfine, it’sthesamesituationyoucan’tget
out.  What’sthepointinaccesstotheareaifyoucan’tgetout?  Ifyoucan’taccessitoruseit.  
Whatisthepoint?   

PresenterJitin- Iappreciateyourcomments. Certainlytheintentofanyoftheseimprovements is
tonotprohibitanyaccessitistheoppositeofthat.  Someoftheissuesarethegreentime, aspart
oftheWesternAvenuerestriping; wearechangingthegreentimesothereismoreonWestern
andlessonOlive. Aswelookedatthetrafficstudywesawthattherewasmoredesireforgreen
timeonWesternthatisgettingfixedaspartoftheprojectwehaveunderway.  Partofthereason
thatWesternisconfusingisbecauseinthepastithasbeendoneinapiecemealmanner.  This
timewearechangingtheentirethree (3) milestretch.  Withthesignalsynchronizationthat
shouldhelpthetraffictoflowmuchbetter.  Theprojectoverhereisn’taddingnewlanesit’s
increasingtheturningradius.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavis- Youhavealreadyaddressedthelanechangesandthenew
stripping.  Thathasalreadyhappened.  Iamtalkingwhathasalreadybeencreated.  Iliveover
there.  Thisplanhasalreadybeenimplemented. WhatIamtellingyourightnowSirisyoucan’t
getinandyoucan’tgetout.   

ThisbeingthetimeheretoforesetforthePublicHearingontheabovebill, proponentsand
opponentsweregivenanopportunitytobeheard.  

Thosewishingtospeakinfavorof:  

40

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

Residentof2047MiamiSt.- IthinkitisgreatfortheCitytomoveon.  Itisaveryunderutilized
property. ItisgreattoseetheCitydoingthisandcontinuingtorevitalizeWesternAve. we are
excitedtoseeit.  Theonethingwementionedistryingtodosomegreatgatewaysandsomething
thatreallyhonorsthePolishcommunitythere, thediversityoftheneighborhoodanddosomething
aswell. Ithinkthiswouldalsoattractpeopletothatarea.    

TherebeingnoonepresentwishingtospeaktotheCouncilinoppositiontothis bill,  
CouncilmemberWhitemadeamotiontoadoptResolution15-92.  CouncilmemberOliverDavis
secondedthemotionwhichcarriedandtheResolutionwasadoptedbyarollcallvoteofsix (6)  
ayesandone (1) nay, CouncilmanHenryDavisJr.  

BILLS - FIRSTREADING

BILLNO.   

54-15

REAFFIRMINGORDIANCE #100332-14ANDFIXINGTHEANNUAL
ANDMONETARYFRINGEBENEFITSOFSWORNMEMBERSOFTHE
SOUTHBENDPOLICEDEPARTMENTFORCALENDARYEAR2016

Thisbillhadfirstreading.  CouncilmemberOliverDavismadeamotiontoreferthisbilltothe
HealthandPublicSafetyCommitteeforOctober12.  CouncilmemberGavinFerlicsecondedthe
motionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

th

55-15

REAFFIRMINGORDIANCE #100333-14ANDFIXINGTHEANNUAL
ANDMONETARYFRINGEBENEFITSOFSWORNMEMBERSOFTHE
FIREDEPARTMENTFORCALENDARYEAR2016

Thisbillhadfirstreading.  CouncilmemberGavinFerlicmadeamotiontoreferthisbilltothe
HealthandPublicSafetyCommitteeforOctober12.   CouncilmemberWhitesecondedthemotion
whichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

th

56-15

SETTINGTHEANNUALSALARYFOR THECOMMONCOUNCILFOR
CALENDARYEAR2016

Thisbillhadfirstreading.  CouncilmemberOliverDavismadeamotiontoreferthisbilltothe
PersonnelandFinanceCommitteeforOctober12.   CouncilmemberDr. Ferlicsecondedthe
motionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.   

th

54-15

SETTINGTHEANNUALSALARYFORTHESOUTHBENDCITYCLERK
FORTHECALENDARYEAR2016

Thisbillhadfirstreading.  CouncilmemberGavinFerlicmadeamotiontoreferthisbilltothe
PersonnelandFinanceCommitteeforOctober12.   CouncilmemberOliverDavissecondedthe
motionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

th

58-15

SETTINGTHEANNUALSALARYFORTHEMAYORFORCALENDAR
YEAR2016

Thisbillhadfirstreading.  CouncilmemberGavinFerlicmadeamotiontoreferthisbilltothe
PersonnelandFinanceCommitteeforOctober12.   CouncilmemberOliverDavissecondedthe
motionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

th

59-15

FIXINGTHEMAXIMUMSALARYFORTEAMSTEREMPLOYEESFOR
CALENDARYEARS2014, 2015, & 2016

41

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

Thisbillhadfirstreading.  CouncilmemberGavinFerlicmadeamotiontoreferthisbilltothe
PersonnelandFinanceCommitteeforOctober12.   CouncilmemberOliverDavissecondedthe
motionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

th

60-15

FIXINGTHEMAXIMUMSALARYFORAPPOINTEDOFFICERSAND
NON-BARGAININGEMPLOYEESOFTHECITYOFSOUTHBENDFOR
CALENDARYEARS2016

Thisbillhadfirstreading.  CouncilmemberGavinFerlicmadeamotiontoreferthisbilltothe
PersonnelandFinanceCommitteeforOctober12.   CouncilmemberOliverDavissecondedthe
motionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

th

61-15

TOVACATETHEFOLLOWINGDESCRIBEDPROPERTYALESSTHAN
FULLWIDTHPORTIONOFSOUTHMAINSTFORMERLYLAFAYETTE
BLVDTHATLIESADJACENTTOPROPERTYOWNEDBYGATES
REALITYLLC. LOCATEDAT4418SOUTHMAINST. FORMERLY
LAFAYETTEBLVD

Thisbillhadfirstreading.  CouncilmemberGavinFerlicmadeamotiontoreferthisbilltothe
PublicWorksandPropertyVacationCommitteeforOctober12.   CouncilmemberOliverDavis
secondedthemotionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

th

62-15

TOVACATETHEFOLLOWINGDESCRIBEDPROPERTYAFULLWIDTH
PORTIONOFOLDSOUTHMAINSTFORMERLYSOUTHMAINSTTHAT
LIESBETWEENLAFAYETTEBLVDANDSOUTHMAINSTADJACENT
TOPROPERTYOWNEDBYTHECITYOFSOUTHBENDBOARDOF
PUBLICWORKLOCATEDAT4201-4219SOUTHMAINST.   

Thisbillhadfirstreading.  CouncilmemberGavinFerlicmadeamotiontoreferthisbilltothe
PublicWorksandPropertyVacationCommitteeforOctober12.   CouncilmemberOliverDavis
secondedthemotionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

th

63-15

REPEALINGitsENTIREARTICLE7TITLEDNOISECONTROLOF
CHAPTER13OFTHESOUTHBENDMUNICIPALCODEANDAMENDING
CHAPTER2-213ADDRESSINGSCHEDULEOFORDINANDCEANDCODE
VIOLATION

Thisbillhadfirstreading.  CouncilmemberGavinFerlicmadeamotiontoreferthisbilltothe
HealthandPublicSafetyCommitteeforOctober12.   CouncilmemberOliverDavissecondedthe
motionwhichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

th

63-15

INITIATEDBYTHEAREAPLANCOMMISIONONBEHALFOFTHE
COMMONCOUNCILOFTHECITYOFSOUTHBEND, INDIANA
REPEALINGCHAPTER6ARTICLE21-06.03NORTHEAST
NEIGHBORHOODDEVELOPMENTNUMBER3OVERLAYZONING
DISTRICTANDREPLACINGITWITHANEWCHAPTER21ARTICLE
6SECTION21-06.3ENTITLEDNORTHEASTNEIGHBORHOODZONING
OVERLAYDISTRICT.    

Thisbillhadfirstreading.  CouncilmemberGavinFerlicmadeamotiontoreferthisbilltoArea
PlanforOctober12.  CouncilmemberOliverDavissecondedthemotionwhichcarriedbyavoice
voteofseven (7) ayes.  

th

CouncilmemberGavinFerlicmadeamotiontosendBills39-15, 39-16, 39-17totheZoningand
AnnexationCommitteeforOctober26.   CouncilmemberOliverDavissecondedthemotion
whichcarriedbyavoicevoteofseven (7) ayes.  

th

UNFINISHEDBUSINESS

42

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- TheissueregardingIDsandCouncilmanDavis’ bill. Whenwill
wehearit?  IknowthereissomeclaritywiththebudgetissueandwithCouncilmanDavis’ bill.   
Itisconfusingtopeoplehowcanwegetthatclearedup?   

CouncilmemberHenryDavis- Idon’tknowIspecificallyaskedtheMayorwhenhewashereto
workwithusanddidn’tgetaclearanswertowhetherhewasinterestedornot.  Hesaidifyou
haveabetterwayofdoingitgiveittohim.  IdidIfiledabillthathasacomprehensiveapproach
todosomeofthingshe’stalkingaboutdoing? It’sadifferentphilosophy, sure. TheCouncilis
thelegislativebodyofthiscitygovernment. DudeIdon’tknowman. Someofisreally
frustratingthatyouaskedandit’snothappening. Idon’tknowwhattheCouncilPresidentfeels
aboutthatIguessweneedtoleanuponhisleadershiponhowhefeelsonhowdoestheCouncil
forgeaconversationwithMayor’sOffice? Sothatthisisasharedeffort. So, thatitcanget
completedforthebestintentionsfortheCouncil, thepeopleandalsotheMayor’sOffice.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Thereisalotofpeoplewhocameheretonightthinkingtheywere
goingtwodifferentways.  Oneisthinkingthebudgetandtheothersthinkingthattherewas
goingtobesomebillpresented. Iamgettingemailsandtextsandtheywanttoknowaboutthe
billandIamsayingtheyaretwodifferentthings.  It’snotthesamething. Idon’twanttoconfuse
peoplethatwearejustgoingtoput $18,000intoabudgetthey’llbehappybecausetheyare
gettingIDsandthenthere’snoIDsandthentheygetmadatallofusforfoolingthem.   

CouncilPresidentTimScott- Iamaskingtheco-sponsorofthebillandtheadministrationtoget
togetherandworkitout.   

CouncilmemberHenryDavis- Thereareeight (8) sponsorsnotone (1) sponsor.  

CouncilPresidentTimScott- Iamaskingthesponsortogettogetherandworkitoutwiththe
Administration. Getittogethercometoasolution.  

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Canwegetanemailonthat? Onwhatthesuggestionis? Andwe
canputsomethingtogether.  Also, canwegetanupdate, wesetupacommittee, thisisalmostthe
endoftheyear, regardingMartinLutherKingJr. wenominatedandoneofournomineesis
sittingrightoutthere. Idon’tbelieveonemeetinghasbeencalledforthestreetrenamingMLK
andournomineesarereadytogo.  Welooklikewearen’tdoingourjob. Whatcanwedotoadd
moreteethtothesituation? Shouldwetieittothebudget? Thebudgetisnotpassedbeforethisis
done. Ithinkit’sunfairforustohavepeoplegothroughthenominationprocess, interviewall
thesepeoplebringthemdownhere. Putthemonacommitteeandthenwaittillnextyear
differentpeoplewillsittinguphere. WhateverhappensIthinkthisisunfair.   

CouncilPresidentTimScott- Iwillaskthatwesendalettertotheadministrationaskingwhat
theirstatusisonit.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- IappreciatethatcanyouCCallofusonit?  

NEWBUSINESS
CouncilmemberHenryDavis- HastheOctobermeetingnoticegoneoutfortheCharlesBlack
Center?   

CouncilAttorney- Itismyunderstandingthatit’llgoouttomorrow. Thetimeis6:30p.m.   

CouncilmemberOliverDavis- Whatday?   

CouncilmemberWhite- ThiscomingThursdayOctober3, 2015. Thiswillbeourlastoff-site
meeting.     

rd

PRIVILEGEOFTHEFLOOR

43

REGULARMEETING

September28, 2015

JesseDavis – P.O. Box10205, SouthBend – Ibroughtuptheissuefortheextramoniesforsalt.   
Ijustwantyouguystolookintothat.  Apparentlywedidn’tgetabidputinproperlyoratthe
wrongtimethat’swhywehavetospendsomeadditionalmoneyeventhoughtheyaresayingit’s
alittlecheaper.  Pleaselookintothat, findoutwhodroppedthatballanddidn’tgetthebidinto
theStateConsortiumontimeandproperly.   

JasonBanicki-Critchlow – 3822W. FordSt., SouthBend – Alotoftimespeoplefind
governmenttobeunresponsiveoratleastthatisacommoncomplainttheyfindthatthingsdon’t
getdonethattheyask.  Iwouldliketosaytheexactoppositeinmyexperienceinfrontofyour
guysthisyear. Ibroughtupseveralissues, theClerk’sOfficenotgettingtheminutesupfor2014
theyarestartingtogoupsoIjustwanttosaythankyouforthatprogress. Ibroughtupissuesin
thedistrictandhadbroughtupissuesinthedispatchcenter, lastweektherewasameetingwith
thedispatchhead.  Lowandbeholdhecouldn’tanswerandhe’sresigned.  Iheardotherpeople
bringupconcretesidewalks, theywererepairedwithintwoweeks. Iappreciatedthewayyou
guyshelpus.  Thewaysyougoaboveandbeyond. Whenwebringissuesyoudoaddressthem,  
thatyoudolookintothem, thatyoudohelpusouttothebestofyourabilities. Ithinksometimes
thesimplethankyou’sgooverlooked. Sincewedohaveourpolicechiefinwaiting, I’dliketo
saycongratulationstoScottRuszkowskiontherecord.     

SamuelBrown – CUBG222NavarreSt., SouthBend – Iamlookingforwardtothenewpolice
chiefthat'sgoingtobeswornintoofficeprettysoon. Bytryingtoturnthecitybackaroundand
maketheneighborhoodsafeagain, Ithinkwiththerashofshootings, deaths, drughouse, we
needtositdownwiththenewpolicechiefandtrytogetourneighborhoodbackinthehandsof
thecitizensofSouthBend. Iamlookingforwardtothat. Iamgoingtogivehimallthesupport
thatIcan. IamaskingtheCounciltodothesame.   

ADJOURNMENT
TherebeingnofurtherbusinesstocomebeforetheCouncil, PresidentTimScottadjournedthe
meetingat11:28p.m.  

ATTEST:      

ATTEST:  

JohnVoorde, CityClerk

TimScott, President

44

